https://www.nytimes.com/article/coronavirus-california-reopening-phases.html
California Reopening: Los Angeles, Tulare, San Bernardino Among Those Eligible - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
167
AdvertisementSupported byHere’s what you need to know about the state’s plan to reopen for business during the coronavirus pandemic.By Sona PatelCalifornia was the first state in the nation to order all residents to stay home to slow the spread of the coronavirus. On May 18, Gov. Gavin Newsom announced that state health officials would relax their criteria for counties that want to reopen their economies faster, provided that they meet public health guidelines.Going forward, officials said they were no longer requiring counties to have zero Covid-19 deaths for two weeks.Things are changing quickly.Each county will have to file documentation showing that it qualifies for a variance from the statewide order, including instituting sufficient testing for communities and proving that local hospital capacity can accommodate a surge of 35 percent in the event of new Covid-19 cases.As of Friday, 48 out of 58 counties had met the readiness criteria for reopening, including Los Angeles, where businesses will be able to reopen as early at this weekend.L.A. County, the epicenter of the state’s coronavirus outbreak, received approval from Mr. Newsom to reopen barbershops and hair salons and to resume in-person dining in restaurants.The announcement comes days after county health officials reopened retail stores and drive-in movie theaters, with restrictions.Local public health officials will decide when and how to reopen more parts of the economy, Mr. Newsom announced on Friday afternoon. “If we see spikes in cases, we will direct counties to put the brakes on moving forward or make more adjustments,” he said. “This is part of the process we’re in.”[See our map of coronavirus cases in California by county.]In April, state leaders unveiled a timeline for how California plans to reopen schools, businesses and public spaces. The framework, which consists of four phases, lays out how the state will inch toward those goals. Counties that were approved for a variance from the statewide order can move further into Stage 2, including opening retail stores and dine-in restaurants, with strict modifications.Stage 1, which the state has passed, means government and private organizations are working to make it consistently safer for essential workers, like grocery employees or nurses. Those workers need more protective equipment and a more robust testing and tracing system.Stage 2, which California entered in early May, is when some lower-risk businesses and public spaces can reopen, with strict modifications that allow for social distancing.Stage 3 will be when higher-risk businesses may reopen, with modifications.Stage 4 will be the end of the state’s stay-at-home order.Read more about each phase, including what will remain closed.[Sign up for our California Today newsletter, for top news and features from across one of America’s largest and most dynamic states.]The state released new guidelines for how houses of worship can begin to reopen. Houses of worship must get the approval of their county public health department in order to reopen, and then limit attendance to 25 percent of their building capacity, or a maximum of 100 attendees, whichever is lower.After three weeks, the state Health Department will assess the effect of the measured reopenings before deciding the next steps.Mr. Newsom released safety rules that he said will allow hair salons and barbershops in most of the state to reopen while mitigating the spread of coronavirus. The new rules direct hair cutters and customers to wear face masks, among other precautions.Beaches are now open (with several restrictions) in Los Angeles, Orange, Ventura, San Diego and Santa Barbara Counties.Currently, beaches in 15 counties are open for some activities. There are no counties whose beaches are fully open.Pismo Beach, on the Central Coast, is open, except for the Pier.[Read more: All 50 states are now reopening. But at what cost?]While many Native American tribal casinos in California remain closed, at least through the end of May, some have forged ahead, including three in San Diego County.On May 15, Mr. Newsom urged a group of tribal leaders in the state to reconsider reopening their casinos in the coming days.“I understand that some tribal governments are planning on reopening casinos on their lands,” Mr. Newsom wrote. “This deeply concerns me, and I urge tribal governments to reconsider and instead make those determinations based on how they align with the current local public health conditions and the statewide stage of reopening.”Updated May 28, 2020States are reopening bit by bit. This means that more public spaces are available for use and more and more businesses are being allowed to open again. The federal government is largely leaving the decision up to states, and some state leaders are leaving the decision up to local authorities. Even if you aren’t being told to stay at home, it’s still a good idea to limit trips outside and your interaction with other people.Touching contaminated objects and then infecting ourselves with the germs is not typically how the virus spreads. But it can happen. A number of studies of flu, rhinovirus, coronavirus and other microbes have shown that respiratory illnesses, including the new coronavirus, can spread by touching contaminated surfaces, particularly in places like day care centers, offices and hospitals. But a long chain of events has to happen for the disease to spread that way. The best way to protect yourself from coronavirus — whether it’s surface transmission or close human contact — is still social distancing, washing your hands, not touching your face and wearing masks.Common symptoms include fever, a dry cough, fatigue and difficulty breathing or shortness of breath. Some of these symptoms overlap with those of the flu, making detection difficult, but runny noses and stuffy sinuses are less common. The C.D.C. has also added chills, muscle pain, sore throat, headache and a new loss of the sense of taste or smell as symptoms to look out for. Most people fall ill five to seven days after exposure, but symptoms may appear in as few as two days or as many as 14 days.If air travel is unavoidable, there are some steps you can take to protect yourself. Most important: Wash your hands often, and stop touching your face. If possible, choose a window seat. A study from Emory University found that during flu season, the safest place to sit on a plane is by a window, as people sitting in window seats had less contact with potentially sick people. Disinfect hard surfaces. When you get to your seat and your hands are clean, use disinfecting wipes to clean the hard surfaces at your seat like the head and arm rest, the seatbelt buckle, the remote, screen, seat back pocket and the tray table. If the seat is hard and nonporous or leather or pleather, you can wipe that down, too. (Using wipes on upholstered seats could lead to a wet seat and spreading of germs rather than killing them.)More than 40 million people — the equivalent of 1 in 4 U.S. workers — have filed for unemployment benefits since the pandemic took hold. One in five who were working in February reported losing a job or being furloughed in March or the beginning of April, data from a Federal Reserve survey released on May 14 showed, and that pain was highly concentrated among low earners. Fully 39 percent of former workers living in a household earning $40,000 or less lost work, compared with 13 percent in those making more than $100,000, a Fed official said.There is an uptick in people reporting symptoms of chilblains, which are painful red or purple lesions that typically appear in the winter on fingers or toes. The lesions are emerging as yet another symptom of infection with the new coronavirus. Chilblains are caused by inflammation in small blood vessels in reaction to cold or damp conditions, but they are usually common in the coldest winter months. Federal health officials do not include toe lesions in the list of coronavirus symptoms, but some dermatologists are pushing for a change, saying so-called Covid toe should be sufficient grounds for testing.Yes, but make sure you keep six feet of distance between you and people who don’t live in your home. Even if you just hang out in a park, rather than go for a jog or a walk, getting some fresh air, and hopefully sunshine, is a good idea.Taking one’s temperature to look for signs of fever is not as easy as it sounds, as “normal” temperature numbers can vary, but generally, keep an eye out for a temperature of 100.5 degrees Fahrenheit or higher. If you don’t have a thermometer (they can be pricey these days), there are other ways to figure out if you have a fever, or are at risk of Covid-19 complications.The C.D.C. has recommended that all Americans wear cloth masks if they go out in public. This is a shift in federal guidance reflecting new concerns that the coronavirus is being spread by infected people who have no symptoms. Until now, the C.D.C., like the W.H.O., has advised that ordinary people don’t need to wear masks unless they are sick and coughing. Part of the reason was to preserve medical-grade masks for health care workers who desperately need them at a time when they are in continuously short supply. Masks don’t replace hand washing and social distancing.If you’ve been exposed to the coronavirus or think you have, and have a fever or symptoms like a cough or difficulty breathing, call a doctor. They should give you advice on whether you should be tested, how to get tested, and how to seek medical treatment without potentially infecting or exposing others.If you’re sick and you think you’ve been exposed to the new coronavirus, the C.D.C. recommends that you call your healthcare provider and explain your symptoms and fears. They will decide if you need to be tested. Keep in mind that there’s a chance — because of a lack of testing kits or because you’re asymptomatic, for instance — you won’t be able to get tested.Charity Navigator, which evaluates charities using a numbers-based system, has a running list of nonprofits working in communities affected by the outbreak. You can give blood through the American Red Cross, and World Central Kitchen has stepped in to distribute meals in major cities.One of the state’s largest tribal casinos, Viejas Casino & Resort, reopened with stricter cleaning procedures. Sycuan announced a Phase 1 reopening for May 20, with limited capacity and select gaming machines, and Valley View Casino & Hotel opened its doors on May 22.Pechanga Tribal Leadership announced that it was targeting a reopening date of June 1 for Pechanga Resort Casino, one of the largest casinos in America.Casinos that remain closed include: Thunder Valley Casino Resort in Placer County; Cache Creek Casino in Yolo County; and San Manuel Casino in San Bernardino County.Tribes are sovereign authorities and not subject to state and local restrictions on operations during the pandemic.California State University, the country’s largest four-year public university system, said that in-person classes at its 23 campuses would be scrapped for the fall semester, with instruction taking place almost entirely online.The state’s other four-year university system, the University of California, with nearly 300,000 students on 10 campuses, has not announced whether its fall classes will be held online, in-person or in a hybrid format.The Chronicle of Higher Education is tracking individual colleges’ plans for the fall. You can search for individual plans here.The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention released more detailed guidance for schools, businesses, transit systems and other industries hoping to reopen safely amid the pandemic after fear that the White House had shelved the guidelines.The 60-page document, which a C.D.C. spokesman said was uploaded over the weekend, adds great detail to six charts that the C.D.C. had released last week.Advertisement