https://www.nytimes.com/2020/04/29/travel/coronavirus-travel-bubble.html
3 Baltic States Announced a ‘Travel Bubble.’ What Is It and Could It Work in the U.S.? - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
246
AdvertisementSupported byEstonia, Latvia and Lithuania announced a plan to allow for internal travel, and Australia and New Zealand are likely to follow suit. But in other parts of the world, establishing such a bubble would be tricky.By Tariro MzezewaEstonia, Latvia and Lithuania plan to open their internal borders for citizens to travel between the three countries beginning on May 15, a decision that creates the first “travel bubble” among European Union countries as coronavirus-related travel restrictions begin to ease.The announcement, made by the prime ministers of the three Baltic nations on Wednesday, follows a statement made in late April by the prime ministers of Australia and New Zealand, who agreed this week to establish a similar bubble when flights between the countries can be safely arranged. Both Australia and New Zealand, compared to other nations, have made significant progress in containing the coronavirus outbreak within their borders.People traveling to the Baltic corridor from other countries will continue to be required to go into isolation for 14 days after entry.“It’s a big step towards life as normal,” wrote Jüri Ratas, the prime minister of Estonia, in a Twitter message.Regional bubbles — among a group of states, for example — could be a way to get people traveling again and help revive businesses as the world readjusts to life with the coronavirus. Earlier in the pandemic, the governors of California, Washington, Oregon, Nevada and Colorado said that they will coordinate the reopening of their states to limit the spread of Covid-19. A travel bubble among those states might make it easier for residents to travel and work across their borders, though spokesmen for the governors of California, Oregon and Washington said that they have not yet discussed creating such a bubble.Travel bubbles imposed by nations — where strict immigration rules can dictate who enters and exits — are one thing. But would they be legal within the United States? Maybe not.“If any states created a bubble to keep out residents of disfavored states, the action would be open to challenge that the bubble violated U.S. Constitutional principles of equal treatment,” said Cam Winton, a lawyer with the firm Dorsey & Whitney, who has been advising people dealing with state-imposed coronavirus rules. “Those principles are enshrined in the Privileges and Immunities Clause, the Equal Protection Clause and the so-called Dormant Commerce Clause, which prohibits states from putting undue burdens on interstate commerce.”Under its police power, a state can deploy nondiscriminatory public health measures like taking the temperature of everyone entering the state or requiring them to go into quarantine, as long as it imposes that rule on every person, regardless of where the person is from.Mr. Winton added that neighboring states could enter into agreements for coordination of checkpoints, sharing data and other anti-coronavirus efforts, but those initiatives would all be subject to the constraints on government power conferred by constitutional rights.In the United States, measures created by some municipalities in recent months have created de facto bubbles, but the porousness of these varies from place to place and would be difficult, if not impossible, to make official without infringing upon the rights of states and citizens, experts said.In Florida, the Keys have become their own bubble. Since March 22, Monroe County, which includes the islands, has had two checkpoints at the top of the Florida Keys Overseas Highway — one at mile marker 112.5 on the 18-mile stretch of U.S. 1 and the other on County Road 905. Only people who can prove that they live or own property or work in the Keys have been allowed onto the chain of islands that is about 60 miles away from Miami.When Key West, the seat of Monroe County, began reopening its beaches and parks on Monday for locals, people from neighboring Miami-Dade County tried to drive to the beach but were turned away at the checkpoints.“Historically we’ve had day trippers come then leave, but Miami-Dade County is a hot spot with a lion’s share of cases, so what we’re trying to do is only allow essential services into the Keys and say that the beach is open only for locals to get out a few hours a day to get sun,” said Teri Johnston, the mayor of Key West. “Our residents want to know that we aren’t relaxing orders in a way that would bring visitors to our island until it is safe for that.”Officials in Key West have been in conversation with business owners, realtors and the administrators of attractions like museums about a phased reopening of the city, in which everything would reopen to locals first, said Alyson Crean, a public information officer.“Everyone agrees that opening up to visitors is the last phase,” Ms. Crean said.For places without the natural geography to help create a bubble, things get murkier. Under Colorado’s new “Safer at Home” policy, people have been ordered by Gov. Jared Polis to limit recreational travel to no more than 10 miles from their homes, and to try to keep essential travel within their county, if possible. Theoretically, those orders would create bubbles that would prevent visitors from traveling to the state’s more isolated areas.However, Estes Park, a tourist town in Larimer County that is the gateway to Rocky Mountain National Park and 30 miles from the nearest city, recently began allowing its hotels and short-term rentals to reopen with social distancing policies in place.Updated May 28, 2020States are reopening bit by bit. This means that more public spaces are available for use and more and more businesses are being allowed to open again. The federal government is largely leaving the decision up to states, and some state leaders are leaving the decision up to local authorities. Even if you aren’t being told to stay at home, it’s still a good idea to limit trips outside and your interaction with other people.Touching contaminated objects and then infecting ourselves with the germs is not typically how the virus spreads. But it can happen. A number of studies of flu, rhinovirus, coronavirus and other microbes have shown that respiratory illnesses, including the new coronavirus, can spread by touching contaminated surfaces, particularly in places like day care centers, offices and hospitals. But a long chain of events has to happen for the disease to spread that way. The best way to protect yourself from coronavirus — whether it’s surface transmission or close human contact — is still social distancing, washing your hands, not touching your face and wearing masks.Common symptoms include fever, a dry cough, fatigue and difficulty breathing or shortness of breath. Some of these symptoms overlap with those of the flu, making detection difficult, but runny noses and stuffy sinuses are less common. The C.D.C. has also added chills, muscle pain, sore throat, headache and a new loss of the sense of taste or smell as symptoms to look out for. Most people fall ill five to seven days after exposure, but symptoms may appear in as few as two days or as many as 14 days.If air travel is unavoidable, there are some steps you can take to protect yourself. Most important: Wash your hands often, and stop touching your face. If possible, choose a window seat. A study from Emory University found that during flu season, the safest place to sit on a plane is by a window, as people sitting in window seats had less contact with potentially sick people. Disinfect hard surfaces. When you get to your seat and your hands are clean, use disinfecting wipes to clean the hard surfaces at your seat like the head and arm rest, the seatbelt buckle, the remote, screen, seat back pocket and the tray table. If the seat is hard and nonporous or leather or pleather, you can wipe that down, too. (Using wipes on upholstered seats could lead to a wet seat and spreading of germs rather than killing them.)More than 40 million people — the equivalent of 1 in 4 U.S. workers — have filed for unemployment benefits since the pandemic took hold. One in five who were working in February reported losing a job or being furloughed in March or the beginning of April, data from a Federal Reserve survey released on May 14 showed, and that pain was highly concentrated among low earners. Fully 39 percent of former workers living in a household earning $40,000 or less lost work, compared with 13 percent in those making more than $100,000, a Fed official said.There is an uptick in people reporting symptoms of chilblains, which are painful red or purple lesions that typically appear in the winter on fingers or toes. The lesions are emerging as yet another symptom of infection with the new coronavirus. Chilblains are caused by inflammation in small blood vessels in reaction to cold or damp conditions, but they are usually common in the coldest winter months. Federal health officials do not include toe lesions in the list of coronavirus symptoms, but some dermatologists are pushing for a change, saying so-called Covid toe should be sufficient grounds for testing.Yes, but make sure you keep six feet of distance between you and people who don’t live in your home. Even if you just hang out in a park, rather than go for a jog or a walk, getting some fresh air, and hopefully sunshine, is a good idea.Taking one’s temperature to look for signs of fever is not as easy as it sounds, as “normal” temperature numbers can vary, but generally, keep an eye out for a temperature of 100.5 degrees Fahrenheit or higher. If you don’t have a thermometer (they can be pricey these days), there are other ways to figure out if you have a fever, or are at risk of Covid-19 complications.The C.D.C. has recommended that all Americans wear cloth masks if they go out in public. This is a shift in federal guidance reflecting new concerns that the coronavirus is being spread by infected people who have no symptoms. Until now, the C.D.C., like the W.H.O., has advised that ordinary people don’t need to wear masks unless they are sick and coughing. Part of the reason was to preserve medical-grade masks for health care workers who desperately need them at a time when they are in continuously short supply. Masks don’t replace hand washing and social distancing.If you’ve been exposed to the coronavirus or think you have, and have a fever or symptoms like a cough or difficulty breathing, call a doctor. They should give you advice on whether you should be tested, how to get tested, and how to seek medical treatment without potentially infecting or exposing others.If you’re sick and you think you’ve been exposed to the new coronavirus, the C.D.C. recommends that you call your healthcare provider and explain your symptoms and fears. They will decide if you need to be tested. Keep in mind that there’s a chance — because of a lack of testing kits or because you’re asymptomatic, for instance — you won’t be able to get tested.Charity Navigator, which evaluates charities using a numbers-based system, has a running list of nonprofits working in communities affected by the outbreak. You can give blood through the American Red Cross, and World Central Kitchen has stepped in to distribute meals in major cities.Kate Rusch, a spokeswoman for the Town of Estes Park, said that essential travelers and people traveling within Larimer County might need accommodations and that the town wanted to be ready for when travel restrictions were loosened further.But some saw the move as an open invitation to visit. Hattie Serrano, a local resident, wrote in a Tweet that hundreds of people had been visiting even during the shelter-in-place order. “Telling people to stay home and then opening hotels at the same time is contradictory to one another. If the hotels are open they will come. They’ve come despite them being closed. Reopening them is a terrible mistake.”Others, like Stephen Rapp, objected to staying within the 10-mile bubble. He tweeted that it would be “unconstitutional” to prevent him from staying in his second home in Estes where he normally spends six months of the year and pays taxes. He asked: “I’m an Estes Park property owner, so am I an outsider or not a local?”In South Carolina, the city of Folly Beach, located on Folly Island, just south of Charleston, found itself in conflict with the state’s governor when it set up checkpoints on the road leading to the island and banned short-term rentals in March. “By creating the checkpoint, we had essentially created a bubble for our island,” said the town’s mayor, Tim Goodwin.But under an order from the state’s attorney general, officials were forced to lift the restrictions. Mr. Goodwin said people immediately began flooding in. “The day that we did lift the checkpoint we went from an average of 2,000 cars to an average of 10,000 cars,” he said.On Peaks Island, an island in Casco Bay, Maine, that is 15 minutes away from downtown Portland and is only accessible by ferry, residents recently asked city leaders to encourage people to only take essential ferry trips to the island out of fear that the guests could increase the number of cases already recorded. Some locals worry that people will flood back to the island over Memorial Day weekend.“It’s a very conflicted situation with community needing the business that comes with visitors, but also needing to prioritize everyone’s health,” said Randy Schaeffer, chair of the Peaks Island Council, which is not a legislative body but an advisory group for the island. “People might want something like a bubble, but we don’t have the legal power to do that and it is highly unlikely that we would be able to keep people from coming here.”“We aren’t North Korea,” he added.Karen Schwartz contributed reporting.Follow New York Times Travel on Instagram, Twitter and Facebook. And sign up for our weekly Travel Dispatch newsletter to receive expert tips on traveling smarter and inspiration for your next vacation.Advertisement