https://www.nytimes.com/2020/05/30/world/coronavirus-news-update.html
Live Coronavirus Pandemic Updates: Lake of the Ozarks, W.H.O., India, California - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
33
AdvertisementSupported byBusinesses are starting up again, but workers commuting by public transportation face dilemmas. The German chancellor will not travel to the U.S. for the G7 summit.Right NowHealth officials in Missouri are scrambling to find people who went to crowded Memorial Day weekend pool parties after an attendee tested positive for Covid-19.The United States Supreme Court on Friday turned away a request from a church in California to block enforcement of state restrictions on attendance at religious services.The vote was 5 to 4, with Chief Justice John G. Roberts Jr. joining the court’s four-member liberal wing to form a majority. It was the court’s first attempt to balance the public health crisis against the Constitution’s protection of religious freedom. It also it expanded the court’s engagement with the consequences of the pandemic, after rulings on voting in Wisconsin and prisons in Texas and Ohio.“Although California’s guidelines place restrictions on places of worship, those restrictions appear consistent with the free exercise clause of the First Amendment,” Chief Justice Roberts wrote in an opinion concurring in the unsigned ruling.Justices Clarence Thomas, Samuel A. Alito Jr., Neil M. Gorsuch and Brett M. Kavanaugh dissented.The case was brought by the South Bay United Pentecostal Church in Chula Vista, which said Gov. Gavin Newsom, a Democrat, had lost sight of the special status of religion in the constitutional structure.“The Covid-19 pandemic is a national tragedy,” lawyers for the church wrote in their Supreme Court brief, “but it would be equally tragic if the federal judiciary allowed the ‘fog of war’ to act as an excuse for violating fundamental constitutional rights.”In defiance of the court’s ruling, a contingent of California evangelical churches said they would hold services in person on Sunday morning without regard to potential violations of state limits on attendance. In Fresno, the Cornerstone Church website showed registration to be full for its Pentecost service. And the Water of Life Community Church in Fontana, Calif., plans to hold a church service Sunday morning followed by a news conference with three pastors, the group’s attorney, and the city’s mayor, Acquanetta Warren (a Republican who is also a member of the church). Although the church’s occupancy is 3,200, it intends to limit attendance to 320 people, which exceeds the state’s guidelines allowing no more than 100 congregants. Chancellor Angela Merkel of Germany does not plan to travel to the United States to attend a Group of 7 meeting in person, her office said Saturday, citing concerns about the coronavirus.“The chancellor thanks President Trump for his invitation to the G-7 summit in Washington at the end of June,” a spokesman for the chancellor said in an emailed statement. “As of today, considering the overall pandemic situation, she cannot agree to her personal participation, a trip to Washington.”In March, Mr. Trump had announced that the summit, scheduled for next month, would take place virtually as the coronavirus outbreak was spreading around the world and international travel was curtailed. But he recently said he planned to invite the leaders of Britain, Canada, France, Germany, Italy and Japan to Washington for the annual meeting, as a demonstration of a return to normalcy.Ms. Merkel’s spokesman said the chancellor would “continue to monitor the development of the pandemic” in the days and weeks ahead.Germany has recorded 181,196 coronavirus cases and 8,489 deaths, while the United States has had 1.7 million cases and 103,391 deaths.Many of the most populous cities in the United States have begun moving cautiously toward reopening key businesses. Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo of New York said on Friday that he expected New York City, where more than 20,000 people have died from the virus, would soon meet several benchmarks that would allow retail, nonessential construction and manufacturing to resume in some capacity. As many as 400,000 people could go back to work in that initial phase, which could begin June 8.Washington and Los Angeles also announced plans to continue their reopenings by allowing restaurants, hair salons and barbershops to open, with new safety guidelines.The reopenings come as the trajectory of the virus has evolved, both in the United States and across the world. New hot spots are emerging in rural areas, and in smaller cities where regulations have been lifted in recent weeks. Globally, as the virus caseload approaches six million, a number of countries have moved to ease restrictions, even as new outbreaks continue to flare up, including in regions where it had been contained:In South Korea, which successfully brought an early outbreak to heel, more than 800 schools have either closed or pushed back reopening. The government also closed museums, parks and many other public facilities in the Seoul area on Friday.In Brazil, even with new cases still trending upward and over 465,166 people infected, officials announced that São Paulo, the largest city in South America, would begin to reopen this week.In Iraq, all travel between provinces has been stopped for a second time. Baghdad was almost completely still on Friday, and stay-at-home orders were enforced by neighborhood blockades.In Israel, where schools reopened weeks ago, more than 100 new cases were reported on Friday, the level that Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu had warned would prompt the reinstatement of a strict lockdown.In Britain, where more outdoor social gatherings will be permitted starting Monday and some schools are scheduled to reopen, at least three members of the government’s top scientific advisory panel have warned publicly against relaxing restrictions.transcriptChina has total control over the World Health Organization despite only paying $40 million per year compared to what the United States has been paying, which is approximately $450 million a year. Chinese officials ignored their reporting obligations to the World Health Organization and pressured the World Health Organization to mislead the world when the virus was first discovered by Chinese authorities. Countless lives have been taken and profound economic hardship has been inflicted all around the globe. We will be today terminating our relationship with the World Health Organization, and redirecting those funds to other worldwide and deserving urgent global public health needs. The world needs answers from China on the virus. We must have transparency.The European Union said on Saturday that it would continue to back the World Health Organization after President Trump announced on Friday that he was pulling the United States’ support, and the bloc urged him to reconsider his decision.“The W.H.O. needs to continue being able to lead the international response to pandemics, current and future,” the president of the European Commission, Ursula von der Leyen, and the bloc’s top diplomat, Josep Borrell, said in a joint statement. “Actions that weaken international results must be avoided,” they added. “We urge the U.S. to reconsider its announced decision.”Jens Spahn, the health minister of Germany, said on Twitter that the U.S. decision was “disappointing” and urged overhaul of the W.H.O.Mr. Trump has said the health organization helped China cover up the emergence of the coronavirus and was deliberately slow to react in the early stages of its spread out of deference to or fear of Beijing. He has repeatedly said that the spread of the virus around the world, and the ensuing death toll, is ultimately the fault of China and the W.H.O., taking no responsibility for the more than 100,000 deaths it has inflicted in the United States.The E.U., which is a major funder of the organization, said it wanted “at the earliest appropriate moment, an impartial, independent and comprehensive evaluation to review lessons learned from the international health response to the coronavirus.”American public health officials have also reacted with alarm to Mr. Trump’s decision. “We helped create the W.H.O.,” said Dr. Thomas Frieden, the former director of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, which has worked with the organization since its creation in 1948. “Turning our back on the W.H.O. makes us and the world less safe,” he added.The organization itself had no immediate response on Saturday.The virus has infected more than 5,958,000 people in at least 177 countries.As states have moved to cautiously lift restrictions on workplaces, critical questions are emerging about the role of public transit in helping employees return. Federal and state leaders have laid out guidelines under which businesses can safely begin operating again, but in many places the transportation systems that get workers and customers to the businesses are still viewed as risky.Advice the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention issued this week urged employees against using mass transit, instead recommending options like individual car-based commuting, which previously was widely discouraged as environmentally unsustainable. The economic viability of many transit systems is also uncertain, as riders have avoided already-strained systems in recent months, and states and cities are facing daunting budget shortfalls. In New York City, ridership is down more than 90 percent, and the subway system was already on the brink of a financial crisis in April, poised to lose $8.5 billion even after service cuts and a $3.8 billion federal bailout. This week, Amtrak announced it would need close to $1.5 billion in federal funds to maintain “minimum service levels.”As part of the CARES act, Transportation Secretary Elaine L. Chao announced $25 billion in grant funding last month aimed at propping up struggling transit systems nationwide. Many city officials have framed the Covid-19 pandemic as an opportunity to rethink urban design and move away from transit models built around car traffic. Cities like Boston, Minneapolis, and Oakland, Calif., have closed off some streets to drivers, encouraging pedestrian and bike traffic. Health officials in Missouri are scrambling to contact “mass numbers of unknown people” after an attendee at crowded pool parties at the Lake of the Ozarks over Memorial Day weekend tested positive for Covid-19.The health department in Camden County, where the parties took place, said in a news release on Friday that the unidentified person, a resident of Boone County, tested positive last Sunday after arriving at the lake area the day before. Videos and photos posted on social media showed throngs of people mingling in close quarters.When images of the event surfaced, Lyda Krewson, the mayor of St. Louis, said, “It’s irresponsible and dangerous to engage in such high risk behavior just to have some fun over the extended holiday weekend.”The Camden County Health Department said in its release that the person was “likely incubating illness and possibly infectious at the time of the visit.” It released a timeline of the person’s movements and asked those who may have been in the area to seek tests and self-isolate if they had symptoms including “fever, cough, shortness of breath, body aches, headache, nausea, vomiting, diarrhea and loss of taste or smell.”Health officials in St. Louis and in Kansas had already urged partygoers to self-isolate for 14 days.The owner of one of the places listed on the timeline, a bar and restaurant called Backwater Jacks, previously said that no laws were broken, though the images appeared to show people violating Gov. Mike Parson’s state order requiring social distancing, according to The Associated Press.The Camden County statement said an investigation was underway by the Boone County Health Department, with Lake area health departments assisting.India on Saturday extended a nationwide lockdown until the end of June, but lifted many restrictions outside hot spots, allowing places of worship, restaurants, hotels and malls to reopen.Though the number of infections in India is still skyrocketing, officials said easing the lockdown was necessary to rescue an ailing economy. The restrictions, which were imposed more than two months ago, have been brutally hard on migrant workers and poor people.The country’s Home Ministry said the new rules, which would take effect on June 8, were part of a broader plan to reopen. Movie theaters and schools will remain shut, but people are now free to move around outside “containment zones,” areas with a high number of infections.“This battle will stretch on, but we are on the way to victory, and to be victorious is our common resolve,” Prime Minister Narendra Modi wrote in a letter to the country on Saturday.Officials began lifting some restrictions last month, hoping to ease suffering in India, a nation of 1.3 billion. But in recent weeks, as industry has resumed and more people have poured onto the streets, the country has emerged as a worrisome outbreak zone.India’s number of daily new infections is among the highest in the world, surpassed only by Brazil, the United States and Russia. The country has reported more than 170,000 total infections and 4,971 deaths.India’s struggles with the virus stand out, as other countries in southern Asia have recently held infections low enough to reopen more aggressively. Thailand has begun reopening restaurants, with other businesses like some salons and gyms cleared to resume operations on June 1. Buddhist amulet markets, where people trade in the tiny talismans, have also been authorized to open with social-distancing measures.Unlike India, though, Thailand disproportionately relies on the tourist economy as a source of revenue, and the country has suffered as tourists have been banned since incoming commercial flights were suspended in early April. The ban on tourists will extend at least through the end of June, jeopardizing as many as 8.4 million jobs. After a dengue epidemic sickened over 100,000 people and left 180 dead in Honduras last year, officials braced for another surge in the mosquito-borne disease this year and wondered how they would manage.Then the coronavirus arrived, pitching the nation into a grueling, two-front public health battle — a crisis mirrored in numerous nations, particularly in the developing world.In the Caribbean and Latin America, where the number of coronavirus cases has been rising sharply, at least nine countries have paused some immunization activities, threatening efforts to control diseases like polio, tuberculosis and measles.Dengue is also bedeviling nations in Southeast Asia, including Indonesia, another country hard hit by the coronavirus. And in Africa, health officials are concerned about recent outbreaks of yellow fever, cholera, measles and Ebola, among other diseases.Vaccination programs in at least 68 countries have been “substantially hindered,” according to a statement released last week by the World Health Organization, UNICEF and Gavi, a public-private partnership that helps provide vaccines to developing countries. And the suspensions could affect about 80 million children under the age of 1.The pandemic “has showed the vulnerabilities of many countries in different manners,” said Dr. Richard Mihigo, the coordinator in Africa for the World Health Organization’s immunization and vaccines development program. Many countries, he said, “have been almost on their knees, paralyzed.”With early-phase reopening plans in many states allowing crowds back into public parks and open spaces for the summer, visitors have increasingly been forced to reckon with opposing views on how to stay safe while exercising.Not helping matters is the byzantine patchwork of advisories that different cities and states have put in place. In most places, no concrete rules require those exercising outdoors to wear face coverings, though carrying a mask as a precaution and keeping a healthy distance is recommended more or less everywhere.Many runners and cyclists find it challenging to inhale through masks as their heart rate rises, prompting some to do without. This has raised questions about how to work out safely, particularly if you’re planning on venturing into a crowded area. There is no scientific consensus around the importance of wearing a mask while exercising, primarily because so little relevant research has been completed. And to date, many of the most basic questions — such as whether heavier breathing increases the risk of spreading the virus (or the social-distancing radius that should be observed) — remain unanswered. Even so, runners can balance safety and personal comfort with a few widely agreed-upon measures, like wearing face gaiters or avoiding running directly behind someone for prolonged periods. Other tips? Refrain from spitting, take a wide berth around others when passing, and think twice before yelling at anyone who may be flouting the rules. In Canada, a growing number of shop workers are back on the job, after the easing of government orders that had closed most stores across the country except in British Columbia. But returning to work is likely to feel uneasy for many, even if it means they are not among the three million Canadians who have lost their jobs during the outbreak.In the meatpacking industry, staying on the job has brought not only widespread illness but also death. In High River, Alberta, a town in the foothills of the Rockies, a meatpacking plant owned by Cargill, which is based in Minnesota, has Canada’s largest single outbreak. More than 1,500 coronavirus infections and three deaths have been linked to the outbreak in the plant, most of them employees. Another meatpacking plant, in Brooks, Alberta, owned by JBS of Brazil, is linked to hundreds of cases. And about 40 federal meat inspectors who work in those plants have become infected as well, the union that represents them said.The High River plant was temporarily closed for cleaning and to allow the installation of, among other things, plastic shields. New safety protocols were also introduced.The structure of the meatpacking industry in the 21st century creates significant economic pressure to keep plants running. Sven Anders, an agricultural economist at the University of Alberta, said the two plants in Alberta plus a Cargill facility in Guelph, Ontario, processed upward of 95 percent of Canada’s beef production, much of which is exported to the United States.A Cambodian major general has died of the coronavirus while on a U.N. peacekeeping mission in Mali, Cambodian officials said Saturday, the second such death among peacekeepers stationed around the world.The major general, Sor Savy, 63, who died on Friday, was deployed to the troubled African nation in April last year. Before the pandemic hit, forcing the United Nations to delay troop rotations, he and his team had been scheduled to return home last month. U.N. Secretary-General Antonio Guterres said on Friday that Covid-19 had claimed its first two victims among the peacekeepers but did not identify them by name. A peacekeeper from El Salvador died of the illness on Thursday.More than 95,000 men and women serve in 13 U.N. missions around the world. U.N. officials say there are 137 confirmed cases of the virus among peacekeepers, most of them in Mali. Cambodia contributes about 800 troops to the U.N. missions, including 300 in Mali. Two other Cambodian peacekeepers stationed there tested positive, Cambodian officials said.“Sor Savy’s death is a huge sacrifice of a Cambodian soldier in a humanitarian mission under the U.N. umbrella and the loss of a bright Cambodian soldier,” a spokesman for Cambodia’s Defense Ministry, Chhum Socheat, said in a Facebook post on Saturday.Several outposts of the U.N.’s peacekeeping mission in Mali have been sealed off to stop the spread of coronavirus. These include two bases in the ancient northern city of Gao and the riverside town of Mopti, both of which used to be tourist hubs but whose more recent visitors often wear military uniforms or the well-known blue peacekeepers’ helmets.The U.N. said even stricter measures could be imposed, and Gao and Mopti had their lockdowns extended to June 4 and June 11.Sui-Lee Wee is a New York Times correspondent who until recently was based in Beijing, where she covered gender, health care and other issues in China. This is her story of moving back to Singapore.“Hey, who are those men?” my 4-year-old son, Luke, said on a video call with his nanny in Beijing, as he peered at masked movers carting boxes.Our nanny was coordinating the packing of our furniture into storage because my family was stuck in Singapore, about 3,000 miles away. Back story: In March, China banned all foreign residents from returning, leaving us stranded in Singapore. My husband, Tom, and I did not want to pay rent on two apartments, so we decided we would pack up the only home my two kids had ever known.The only problem was that desperately homesick Luke did not know this yet.“They’re helping us fix some stuff,” Tom explained to him.“What? All the doors are broken?” “Yep.”A week earlier, our nanny had done a walk-through of our apartment and sent several video clips of our possessions: the pink hand-me-down balance bike that Luke never rode, Liam’s crib, Luke’s fire-engine bunk bed. All of it felt frozen in time. Our Pompeii.I couldn’t decide how to broach the topic with Luke. I had always told him about what was happening in the world (within reason), but Beijing was his world. and he still asked repeatedly: “Why are we staying in Singapore for SO LONG?”So while I was giving him his bath, I dove in. “Hey, you know the men you saw on the video today? They were moving our stuff into a big storeroom.” Pause. “And maybe one day, we can go back and get them again.”“Oh, OK,” Luke responded. That’s it? I thought. It was a reminder not to foist my anxieties onto my children. The kids, hopefully, will be all right.Are you finding it difficult to sit down and read? You’re not alone. Here are a few strategies that can help you get more out of your next book.Reporting was contributed by Ian Austen, Hannah Beech, Emily Cochrane, Ben Dooley, Melissa Eddy, Jenny Gross, Rebecca Halleck, Anemona Hartocollis, Shawn Hubler, Makiko Inoue, Andrew Jacobs, Yonette Joseph, Annie Karni, Adam Liptak, Ruth Maclean, Apoorva Mandavilli, Donald G. McNeil Jr., Raphael Minder, Zach Montague, Sun Narin, Richard C. Paddock, Robin Pogrebin, Suhasini Raj, Peter Robins, Alissa J. Rubin, Choe Sang-Hun, Marc Santora, Kai Schultz, Kirk Semple, Somini Sengupta, Daniel Slotnik, Rory Smith, Matina Stevis-Gridneff, Anton Troianovski, Vivian Wang, Sui-Lee Wee, Sameer Yasir and Vivian Yee.Advertisement