https://www.nytimes.com/2020/05/19/us/college-fall-2020-coronavirus.html
College in the Fall of 2020: Fever Checks and Quarantine Dorms - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
177
AdvertisementSupported byWe listened as University of Kentucky administrators discussed bringing students back to campus, providing a glimpse into what other schools might do in the fall.By Anemona HartocollisFever checkpoints at the entrances to academic buildings. One-way paths across the grassy quad. Face masks required in classrooms and dining halls. And a dormitory turned quarantine facility for any students exposed to the coronavirus.That was one vision for the fall semester at the University of Kentucky conjured up by a special committee last week — and not the most dystopian scenario.In a series of planning meetings on Zoom, dozens of key leaders at the university, including deans, police officers and a sorority and fraternity liaison, debated whether and how to reopen its campus in Lexington, Ky., amid an active outbreak.Similar discussions have taken place at almost every American college and university over the past few weeks, as administrators fiercely debate whether they can safely reopen their campuses, even as most provide students with encouraging messages about the prospects of returning in the fall.On Monday, Notre Dame became one of the first major universities in the country to announce detailed plans for bringing back students, saying it would put in effect a regimen of testing and contact tracing, put quarantine and isolation protocols in place and require students to maintain social distancing and wear masks in public.Notre Dame’s decision is in contrast to an announcement last week by the California State University system, which will keep its 23 campuses largely shut and teach nearly half a million students remotely. Most other universities have said they were planning to reopen in the fall, but have yet to announce specific plans.Colleges were closed in a rushed and chaotic fashion two months ago, disrupting students’ lives and costing tens of billions of dollars in lost revenue, according to a survey by the American Council on Education, a trade group. But opening up, though vital to the survival of some institutions, is proving much more intricate than shutting down.The University of Kentucky allowed a reporter from The New York Times to listen in on its discussions, in part to show how deliberately administrators were working through the possibilities in such fraught times for the country.“This is a moonshot, to do something this quickly,” said Eli Capilouto, the university’s president, who spent many years as a professor of public health policy and has led Kentucky’s flagship institution since 2011.The online discussions revealed the complicated balancing act facing the university as it considers the risks for 30,000 students and 18,000 faculty and staff members and searches for answers with limited knowledge of what the future will bring.“Can you hear me?” Dr. Robert DiPaola, the medical college dean, asked during one of the meetings, in what has become an oft-repeated line in the days of virtual conferencing.Sitting alone at a gleaming oval conference table in his office, Dr. DiPaola injected some of the grimmest reality into the discussions, with concerns about sanitation and testing. The university might have to distribute thermometers to everyone, he said, and require students to report symptoms on a cellphone app every day to be cleared for classes.The administrators studied complex models, considering if Kentucky could hold in-person classes before Thanksgiving and then online classes for the rest of the fall semester; if it could reduce classroom crowding through a longer day; or if it should allow only certain groups of students on campus, like freshmen, who administrators said would benefit the most from the experience.Dr. Capilouto is expected to announce a decision in June. His public health background, he said, made some of the risks and challenges facing the university more clear to him. While visiting Zambia during the AIDS epidemic, for instance, he observed that treatment alone was not enough to stem a health crisis.“You also had to change behavior,” he said — something that his advisers agreed would be especially difficult on a college campus. Whatever course they choose will require enforcing profound changes to the traditions of college life.“There’s no way you can have a quote-unquote old-fashioned, like fall 2019, semester again,” Sue Roberts, an associate provost, said during one virtual meeting in her crisp English accent. “That’s not going to happen.”To think through scenarios, the university split its administrators and advisers into three groups, named after the school’s colors and mascot. There was Team Blue, Team White and Team Wildcat.Although the school is known for its basketball championships, athletics did not factor into the discussions, nor did a hazing scandal that resulted Monday in the firing of the cheerleading squad’s entire coaching staff.The job of each team, and a separate group of medical experts, was to develop scenarios that could be distilled into a final plan for the fall semester and beyond.The list of questions they tried to answer started with the most basic: Would anyone even want to come back?Students are tired of being at home and eager to return, offered Anna Bosch, associate dean of the college of arts and sciences. “I know this from personal experience,” she added, flashing a warm smile, “because I have two college students living back at home with me right now.”But there was a divide between undergraduates and those who teach them on the question of reopening, Dr. Bosch said into her computer, a painting of clouds and water on the wall behind her.At a recent faculty senate meeting, she had been surprised to hear from many professors who were reluctant to return. They were worried, she said, because they or someone close to them had underlying health conditions, or because they were fearful of bringing the virus home to their spouses and children.The wary faculty might have a point, replied Capt. Rob Turner of the campus police department. The university did not operate in a vacuum, he argued.Much would depend on what national, state and local governments did over the next few months, he said. Like Indiana, where Notre Dame is, Kentucky is not currently a hot spot for known coronavirus cases. Gov. Andy Beshear, a Democrat, is permitting businesses to gradually open up, which could put pressure on the university, a state institution.But what, Captain Turner asked, if Fayette County public schools did not open in the fall?“That’s a really serious one,” Dr. Bosch said. “It’ll be very difficult for us to bring everybody back on campus, including faculty and staff, if the public schools aren’t open.”The scenario many committee members were drawn to involved bringing everyone back to campus as usual, even though it was clear that things could not be truly normal.“We know there’s going to be no such thing," said Dr. Roberts, who headed up Team Blue.But a full return for the fall would also be the riskiest.“We’re worried,” Dr. Roberts added. “What would happen if there was another outbreak of Covid-19, and worse, what would happen if we, in some ways, were complicit?”transcriptYou’re looking at a virtual reality image of a coronavirus patient at George Washington Hospital in Washington, D.C. The patient is a generally healthy 59-year-old man with high blood pressure. Just days before this image was created, he was asymptomatic. But now, those green areas show where the infection has damaged tissue in the lungs. For many, Covid-19 will be mild, but for others it’s deadly. This video is about the latter path: How the virus kills. We’ll start in China: 191 confirmed Covid-19 patients were in a hospital in Wuhan — 54 died. Of those 54, 50 had a condition known as ARDS, Acute Respiratory Distress Syndrome. It’s a condition that stops oxygen from reaching the organs. “You have air hunger.” “It means that they can’t breathe.” “There’s a very strong correlation between the people who develop ARDS and the people who die.” ARDS is not unique to Covid-19. “It’s such a long list of causes: infection, people with H.I.V./AIDS. If you get into a big motor vehicle accident and sustain multiple injuries to multiple organs, that causes ARDS, SARS and MERS. Now, things that you inhale and that can be toxic can cause ARDS: household bleach, you know, war gases, mustard gas and phosgene. To the people who vaped THC that was contaminated with vitamin E acetate, and those patients were also developing ARDS.” Here’s what’s actually happening when you get ARDS. When we breathe in air, oxygen goes down our windpipe and fills the lungs. Specifically, the small air sacs at the end of the lungs are the key to air exchange in the body. “So that’s why nature has created, or evolution has created, this very, very — the barrier is so thin. It’s just a few micrometers in size. So the oxygen has to go through just a little bit of collagen, the cell that lines the alveolus, into the red blood cell. Once it gets into the red blood cell, then the blood takes it back into the heart and from there to the rest of the body.” And this is the key to understanding why Covid-19 is killing people. “That entire wall of the air sac gets damaged by the virus. Think of it like a thick layer of paint on the inside of the walls of a room or a thick layer of mold on the walls on the inside of the room. That’s what it looks like.” As that wall becomes thicker, oxygen can no longer pass into the bloodstream, and your organs begin to suffocate. So if you are sick, you might be asking yourself: Am I on the mild path or the serious path? A good indication is whether you have severe shortness of breath and for how long. Those are indications the virus has progressed lower into the lungs. One small study of hospitalized patients in China found that zero to two days after development of symptoms, chest scans were coming back normal for more than half of patients. Keep in mind, these are patients that were sick enough to be in the hospital. But within three to five days after symptoms started, that flipped, and 91 percent of hospitalized patients had significant respiratory issues. “As you progress beyond the seven to 10 days stage, that’s when the ARDS seems to be developing. And once it develops, it develops rapidly fast compared to ARDS developing from let’s say another cause. And these patients seem to be doing much worse over a relatively faster period of time.” Many people have mild or even no symptoms with the virus. But the longer Covid-19 affects your lungs, the higher the risk of serious respiratory issues. “And the longer you’re on the ventilator, the less likelihood you will come off the ventilator. That is the blunt truth of this situation.” “When I saw this in our first patient, and you see the extent of the damage and how it affects both lungs and various parts of the lungs, and it’s much more striking even for somebody who’s been in practice for almost 20 years.” And that’s what happened to this patient. “Just about one week after being at our hospital, unfortunately he passed away. Really my goal of trying to get this out into the public is so that they understand the severity of the problem that we’re seeing, and why the social distancing and the flatten the curve, and every other hashtag that’s come up in the past couple weeks, is just so, so important — is because this is a community-wide problem. It’s a global problem, and it’s going to take a community solution. Right? Everybody has a role to play. And if you’re not in the health care field right now, your role is to stay home. All right? Because again, the virus doesn’t move on its own. People move. People transmit the virus.” Gov. Cuomo: “And the longer you’re on the ventilator, the less likelihood you will come off the ventilator.”At the same time, Dr. Roberts acknowledged that students and faculty alike were dealing with “burnout from virtual teaching and learning,” and that continuing to hold classes online could deter students from enrolling or returning, costing millions of dollars in revenue.Already, the university was projecting that the freshman class would shrink by about 1,000 students this fall, to 4,500, because of health and economic concerns. An online-only semester would most likely push those numbers even lower.And Dr. Roberts said an empty campus in the fall “might dull the enthusiasm of our donors and alums,” further draining the school’s finances. The university is projecting losses of up to $275 million this year for its campus and medical center from the virus, and $70 million next year on the academic side, and has announced plans to furlough some staff members.Part of the problem, said Kathryn Cardarelli, a senior assistant provost, was the widespread perception that remote education is inferior, motivating students to demand a tuition reduction for online courses.From her office with industrial yellow walls, Dr. Cardarelli, an epidemiologist, made a strong case that the pandemic offered a chance to improve and expand online education, positioning the university to capture more of that market.“We think the university should get out ahead and control the narrative,” she said.In case bringing everyone back proved too risky, committee members considered options to reduce the campus population, and thus reduce the likelihood of transmission.Ideas were tossed out rapidly: Maybe only freshmen and seniors should attend classes in person, which Team Blue called the “bookend” model.Or maybe athletes, artists or researchers would benefit most from the use of practice fields, studios and labs.Team Blue argued for bringing back freshmen and sophomores, giving new students the chance to get their footing socially and academically and trying to alleviate the dreaded “sophomore slump,” while leaving more seasoned juniors and seniors to take classes mostly online.Updated May 28, 2020States are reopening bit by bit. This means that more public spaces are available for use and more and more businesses are being allowed to open again. The federal government is largely leaving the decision up to states, and some state leaders are leaving the decision up to local authorities. Even if you aren’t being told to stay at home, it’s still a good idea to limit trips outside and your interaction with other people.Touching contaminated objects and then infecting ourselves with the germs is not typically how the virus spreads. But it can happen. A number of studies of flu, rhinovirus, coronavirus and other microbes have shown that respiratory illnesses, including the new coronavirus, can spread by touching contaminated surfaces, particularly in places like day care centers, offices and hospitals. But a long chain of events has to happen for the disease to spread that way. The best way to protect yourself from coronavirus — whether it’s surface transmission or close human contact — is still social distancing, washing your hands, not touching your face and wearing masks.Common symptoms include fever, a dry cough, fatigue and difficulty breathing or shortness of breath. Some of these symptoms overlap with those of the flu, making detection difficult, but runny noses and stuffy sinuses are less common. The C.D.C. has also added chills, muscle pain, sore throat, headache and a new loss of the sense of taste or smell as symptoms to look out for. Most people fall ill five to seven days after exposure, but symptoms may appear in as few as two days or as many as 14 days.If air travel is unavoidable, there are some steps you can take to protect yourself. Most important: Wash your hands often, and stop touching your face. If possible, choose a window seat. A study from Emory University found that during flu season, the safest place to sit on a plane is by a window, as people sitting in window seats had less contact with potentially sick people. Disinfect hard surfaces. When you get to your seat and your hands are clean, use disinfecting wipes to clean the hard surfaces at your seat like the head and arm rest, the seatbelt buckle, the remote, screen, seat back pocket and the tray table. If the seat is hard and nonporous or leather or pleather, you can wipe that down, too. (Using wipes on upholstered seats could lead to a wet seat and spreading of germs rather than killing them.)More than 40 million people — the equivalent of 1 in 4 U.S. workers — have filed for unemployment benefits since the pandemic took hold. One in five who were working in February reported losing a job or being furloughed in March or the beginning of April, data from a Federal Reserve survey released on May 14 showed, and that pain was highly concentrated among low earners. Fully 39 percent of former workers living in a household earning $40,000 or less lost work, compared with 13 percent in those making more than $100,000, a Fed official said.There is an uptick in people reporting symptoms of chilblains, which are painful red or purple lesions that typically appear in the winter on fingers or toes. The lesions are emerging as yet another symptom of infection with the new coronavirus. Chilblains are caused by inflammation in small blood vessels in reaction to cold or damp conditions, but they are usually common in the coldest winter months. Federal health officials do not include toe lesions in the list of coronavirus symptoms, but some dermatologists are pushing for a change, saying so-called Covid toe should be sufficient grounds for testing.Yes, but make sure you keep six feet of distance between you and people who don’t live in your home. Even if you just hang out in a park, rather than go for a jog or a walk, getting some fresh air, and hopefully sunshine, is a good idea.Taking one’s temperature to look for signs of fever is not as easy as it sounds, as “normal” temperature numbers can vary, but generally, keep an eye out for a temperature of 100.5 degrees Fahrenheit or higher. If you don’t have a thermometer (they can be pricey these days), there are other ways to figure out if you have a fever, or are at risk of Covid-19 complications.The C.D.C. has recommended that all Americans wear cloth masks if they go out in public. This is a shift in federal guidance reflecting new concerns that the coronavirus is being spread by infected people who have no symptoms. Until now, the C.D.C., like the W.H.O., has advised that ordinary people don’t need to wear masks unless they are sick and coughing. Part of the reason was to preserve medical-grade masks for health care workers who desperately need them at a time when they are in continuously short supply. Masks don’t replace hand washing and social distancing.If you’ve been exposed to the coronavirus or think you have, and have a fever or symptoms like a cough or difficulty breathing, call a doctor. They should give you advice on whether you should be tested, how to get tested, and how to seek medical treatment without potentially infecting or exposing others.If you’re sick and you think you’ve been exposed to the new coronavirus, the C.D.C. recommends that you call your healthcare provider and explain your symptoms and fears. They will decide if you need to be tested. Keep in mind that there’s a chance — because of a lack of testing kits or because you’re asymptomatic, for instance — you won’t be able to get tested.Charity Navigator, which evaluates charities using a numbers-based system, has a running list of nonprofits working in communities affected by the outbreak. You can give blood through the American Red Cross, and World Central Kitchen has stepped in to distribute meals in major cities.“Freshmen have already had a terrible end to their senior year of high school, and are hungry for an on-campus experience,” Dr. Roberts said, making Team Blue’s case. “This would set them up for success.”And from a financial standpoint, she noted, it would not hurt that freshmen and sophomores are the biggest users of the residence and dining halls, a valuable source of revenue for the university.Just as important as the question of whom to bring back was the matter of when, and for how long.Notre Dame said on Monday that it would start the fall semester on Aug. 10, two weeks early, and end it before Thanksgiving, forgoing fall break. The University of South Carolina made a similar announcement, saying it would also skip fall break and switch to remote instruction after Thanksgiving.In Kentucky, the teams debated similar ideas, talking about reconfiguring the traditional 16-week semester in a number of ways: Split it into two eight-week half-semesters, or go for 12 weeks plus four weeks, or even five, five and five.Such changes would allow for maximum flexibility, proponents of the various scenarios said, in case another outbreak forced administrators to send students home again for virtual instruction, as they did in March.Dr. Bosch wryly pointed out that there was no guarantee that the virus would return on schedule, at precisely eight weeks or five weeks. “That didn’t seem like something that we could really count on,” she said.Another idea, delaying the start of classes until September or October, would give the university more time for planning. But it would also push the semester later into the fall, when public health experts expect a possible second wave of cases.Thanksgiving quickly emerged as a danger zone. What if students left for the holiday, then brought the virus back to campus with them?“It’s critical,” said Donna Arnett, dean of the college of public health, to “eliminate fall break and try to get students out of here at Thanksgiving.”Shorten the semester to 12 weeks, her side urged, and keep students away from Thanksgiving through January. To make up for lost credits, an online class could be added in December.And the university would have to test everyone when they returned.Testing, in fact, would need to be a major undertaking for in-person classes to resume, said Dr. DiPaola, the medical school dean, sitting alone at his office conference table in a suit and tie. But it might not be feasible right away.The university currently has the ability to test about 800 people a day. But to screen everyone as they arrived on campus, he said, would require help from a private lab or the state.To reduce the need for widespread tests during the semester, he envisioned using a cellphone app to keep sick students away from classes: If they answered “no” to every symptom — cough, fever, potentially loss of smell and taste — they would receive a “day pass” to flash at building entrance checkpoints.Such an app is already being used by the university’s medical staff members, he said.The nonmedical experts offered their own ideas for sanitation and social distancing: Hands-free faucets and doors that open with foot pedals. Large lecture classes broken into smaller sections. Seats blocked off in classrooms to keep students six feet apart.Team Wildcat suggested turning residence halls into protective cocoons for living and learning.“We have students functioning in pods, almost like family units,” Dr. Cardarelli told her colleagues, describing the idea. “They’re spending most of their time in residence halls together with the same students.”Professors would come to the dorms to teach, she said, or do it via videoconference. This would reduce circulation and transmission of the virus, and make it easier to do contact tracing, her group theorized.The student pods would take turns going to the dining halls. And, Dr. Cardarelli added, “no more buffet.”The more they talked, the less it sounded like a dream experience.For many students, part of the joy of college is playing Frisbee in the grass, studying over shared boxes of pizza, going to fraternity parties and drinking at town bars.Now the reinvention teams were talking about young adults wearing masks all day and staying six feet apart at all times. Even if administrators could enforce the rules on campus, said Andrew Smith, the assistant provost for health and wellness, what about after hours?“How we can make that into a campus culture — really, we didn’t come up with an idea for that,” he said.Susan Beachy contributed research.Advertisement