https://www.nytimes.com/2020/03/12/us/coronavirus-testing-challenges.html
Sick People Across the U.S. Say They Are Being Denied the Coronavirus Test - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
203
AdvertisementSupported byIn a health care system that is already difficult to navigate, some patients describe Kafkaesque quests for tests.By Farah StockmanBOSTON — First came the tickle in the throat. Then, a hacking cough. Then, a shortness of breath she had never experienced before. Hillary King, a 32-year-old consultant in Boston who lives down the street from a hotel where dozens of Biogen executives contracted the new coronavirus, decided that she had better get tested.But getting tested is far easier said than done, even as testing slowly ramps up nationwide. Five days after President Trump announced that anyone who wants a test can get a test, Ms. King’s experience shows how difficult it can be in the United States to find out if you have the coronavirus.Many who fear they have the virus have faced one roadblock after another as they try to get tested, according to interviews with dozens of people across the country.Some have been rejected because they had no symptoms, even though they had been in proximity to someone who tested positive. Others were told no because they had not traveled to a hot spot abroad, even though they had fevers and hacking coughs and lived in cities with growing outbreaks. Still others were told a bitter truth: There simply were not enough tests to go around.“The system is not really geared to what we need right now, what you are asking for. That is a failing,” said Dr. Anthony S. Fauci, who leads the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, in testimony before the House Committee on Oversight and Reform on Thursday. “It is a failing. I mean, let’s admit it.”Dr. Fauci added: “The idea of anybody getting it easily the way people in other countries are doing it, we are not set up for that. Do I think we should be? Yes. But we are not.”In some parts of the country, demand for the tests is low. Elsewhere efforts are underway to make testing easier. States like Colorado have even instituted drive-through testing to streamline the process.But even there, demand has far outstripped supply. By 11 a.m. at one drive-through lab in the Denver neighborhood of Lowry on Thursday, a three-hour line of cars had formed. The clinic had to stop allowing more vehicles.The inability to test widely in the United States — which is far behind other countries in this regard — has severely hampered efforts to contain the outbreak. An early test rolled out to states by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention was flawed, and delays have continued ever since. Public health experts have warned that each day people do not know whether they have the virus, they risk spreading it more widely.In cities that have experienced serious outbreaks — Seattle; Boston; New Rochelle, N.Y. — patients who fear they have coronavirus describe Kafkaesque quests to find out their status.“They said they do think it is possible that I have the virus,” said Ms. King, who spent five hours in the emergency room at Massachusetts General Hospital on Wednesday. “They said they really want to test me.”A doctor told her she did not meet the criteria since she had not traveled abroad or had any contact with a person who had tested positive, but because she was so sick he tried to get an exemption from the state’s Department of Public Health. When it was not granted, doctors sent her home, where she plans to stay in self-quarantine for 14 days.The number of tests in Massachusetts were said to be so scarce that even people who were in close contact with some of the dozens who tested positive at a recent Biogen conference have not been given the test. At least one Biogen employee has been ordered to quarantine at home, but he has not been given the test because he is not showing symptoms.Hours after Ms. King was sent home, doctors were informed that a new batch of test kits was being sent to Massachusetts. Public health officials said that they expected enough kits to test 5,000 people and that two commercial labs — Quest Diagnostics and LabCorp — have started testing. On Thursday, one returned a presumptive positive case, which was included in the state’s numbers.But many in the medical community said that far more tests were needed.“In a large city, you should be doing at least 1,000 a week, and ideally you’d be doing 10,000,” said Marc Lipsitch, director of the Center for Communicable Disease Dynamics at the Harvard T.H. Chan School of Public Health. He said the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services has allocated a “laughably small number of tests” to look for signs of community transmission.Fewer than 2,000 people in total have been tested since New York State was approved to test in-state in late February, even with an escalation in testing in the last several days, according to officials.For now it appears that a large majority of New Yorkers who end up having the coronavirus are likely to not know it during the duration of their illness because testing is so limited.Several state labs in California have been unable to use some of the state’s more than 8,000 test kits because the kits lack chemical ingredients known as reagents, Gov. Gavin Newsom said in a briefing on Thursday.Mr. Newsom compared the problem to having a printer without ink cartridges.“We want to test more people,” Mr. Newsom said. “This has been an issue in terms of providing more tests,” he said of the missing components, “and we hope it is resolved very quickly.”For days Mr. Newsom has lamented the lack of testing capabilities in the state. On Tuesday he pounded the lectern in a live television briefing and said, “The bottom line is that we need more tests.”Some places, like Missouri, have more testing capacity than demand. The state laboratory can test about 100 specimens per day but is doing less than 20, according to Lisa Cox, a spokeswoman for the Missouri Department of Health and Senior Services. Sixty-five people total have been tested in the state, and all but one turned out negative.But even states that have seen few cases are preserving their tests for patients who are viewed as most at risk.“You want to be judicious,” said Dr. Dora Mills, an epidemiologist and the chief health improvement officer for MaineHealth, the largest health system in Maine, which has seen only one patient test positive, and no sign of community spread. “Any time you have an epidemic, you have two epidemics — you have the epidemic of the disease itself, and you have the epidemic of fear.”But in places that have seen cases spike in recent weeks, many people expressed frustration that the more likely they were to get the virus, the less likely they were to have access to a test.In Washington State, where at least 378 people have tested positive and 31 have died, public health officials spoke of having to ration the tests and living hand-to-mouth with testing supplies. “At this time we are limiting testing to preserve availability for our most vulnerable,” said Debra Carnes, a spokeswoman for PeaceHealth Columbia Network, a nonprofit health system that operates clinics in Washington, Oregon and Alaska.Overlake Medical Center in Bellevue, Wash., has been running low on nasal swabs to collect specimens from patients.Updated May 28, 2020States are reopening bit by bit. This means that more public spaces are available for use and more and more businesses are being allowed to open again. The federal government is largely leaving the decision up to states, and some state leaders are leaving the decision up to local authorities. Even if you aren’t being told to stay at home, it’s still a good idea to limit trips outside and your interaction with other people.Touching contaminated objects and then infecting ourselves with the germs is not typically how the virus spreads. But it can happen. A number of studies of flu, rhinovirus, coronavirus and other microbes have shown that respiratory illnesses, including the new coronavirus, can spread by touching contaminated surfaces, particularly in places like day care centers, offices and hospitals. But a long chain of events has to happen for the disease to spread that way. The best way to protect yourself from coronavirus — whether it’s surface transmission or close human contact — is still social distancing, washing your hands, not touching your face and wearing masks.Common symptoms include fever, a dry cough, fatigue and difficulty breathing or shortness of breath. Some of these symptoms overlap with those of the flu, making detection difficult, but runny noses and stuffy sinuses are less common. The C.D.C. has also added chills, muscle pain, sore throat, headache and a new loss of the sense of taste or smell as symptoms to look out for. Most people fall ill five to seven days after exposure, but symptoms may appear in as few as two days or as many as 14 days.If air travel is unavoidable, there are some steps you can take to protect yourself. Most important: Wash your hands often, and stop touching your face. If possible, choose a window seat. A study from Emory University found that during flu season, the safest place to sit on a plane is by a window, as people sitting in window seats had less contact with potentially sick people. Disinfect hard surfaces. When you get to your seat and your hands are clean, use disinfecting wipes to clean the hard surfaces at your seat like the head and arm rest, the seatbelt buckle, the remote, screen, seat back pocket and the tray table. If the seat is hard and nonporous or leather or pleather, you can wipe that down, too. (Using wipes on upholstered seats could lead to a wet seat and spreading of germs rather than killing them.)More than 40 million people — the equivalent of 1 in 4 U.S. workers — have filed for unemployment benefits since the pandemic took hold. One in five who were working in February reported losing a job or being furloughed in March or the beginning of April, data from a Federal Reserve survey released on May 14 showed, and that pain was highly concentrated among low earners. Fully 39 percent of former workers living in a household earning $40,000 or less lost work, compared with 13 percent in those making more than $100,000, a Fed official said.There is an uptick in people reporting symptoms of chilblains, which are painful red or purple lesions that typically appear in the winter on fingers or toes. The lesions are emerging as yet another symptom of infection with the new coronavirus. Chilblains are caused by inflammation in small blood vessels in reaction to cold or damp conditions, but they are usually common in the coldest winter months. Federal health officials do not include toe lesions in the list of coronavirus symptoms, but some dermatologists are pushing for a change, saying so-called Covid toe should be sufficient grounds for testing.Yes, but make sure you keep six feet of distance between you and people who don’t live in your home. Even if you just hang out in a park, rather than go for a jog or a walk, getting some fresh air, and hopefully sunshine, is a good idea.Taking one’s temperature to look for signs of fever is not as easy as it sounds, as “normal” temperature numbers can vary, but generally, keep an eye out for a temperature of 100.5 degrees Fahrenheit or higher. If you don’t have a thermometer (they can be pricey these days), there are other ways to figure out if you have a fever, or are at risk of Covid-19 complications.The C.D.C. has recommended that all Americans wear cloth masks if they go out in public. This is a shift in federal guidance reflecting new concerns that the coronavirus is being spread by infected people who have no symptoms. Until now, the C.D.C., like the W.H.O., has advised that ordinary people don’t need to wear masks unless they are sick and coughing. Part of the reason was to preserve medical-grade masks for health care workers who desperately need them at a time when they are in continuously short supply. Masks don’t replace hand washing and social distancing.If you’ve been exposed to the coronavirus or think you have, and have a fever or symptoms like a cough or difficulty breathing, call a doctor. They should give you advice on whether you should be tested, how to get tested, and how to seek medical treatment without potentially infecting or exposing others.If you’re sick and you think you’ve been exposed to the new coronavirus, the C.D.C. recommends that you call your healthcare provider and explain your symptoms and fears. They will decide if you need to be tested. Keep in mind that there’s a chance — because of a lack of testing kits or because you’re asymptomatic, for instance — you won’t be able to get tested.Charity Navigator, which evaluates charities using a numbers-based system, has a running list of nonprofits working in communities affected by the outbreak. You can give blood through the American Red Cross, and World Central Kitchen has stepped in to distribute meals in major cities.“We expected another shipment tomorrow,” said Morgan Brice, a public relations specialist.One mother in Kitsap County, Wash., said her doctor told her that the state was so low on tests that only one of her children could be tested.That left many anxious people with mild symptoms running a never-ending gantlet: primary care doctors referred them to state public health officials, who referred them to emergency rooms, who referred them back to primary care doctors. Some patients said they gave up and went into self-quarantine, and had to make peace with the idea that they will never know for sure if they had the virus.Christy Karras of Seattle tried to get tested after some people at a party she attended came down with flu-like symptoms. But her doctor did not have the test and advised her that it did not matter whether she had the virus: Either way, she had to stay home.“From a public policy standpoint, that’s true,” Ms. Karras said. “From an individual standpoint, you really want to know what you have. It was very frustrating to me because we were all trying to do the right thing.”Finally, Ms. Karras contacted the Seattle Flu Study, a research project to study the spread of influenza in the region. She ordered a kit, sent her sample and heard back: She was positive for the coronavirus. (Since then, the flu study has been told by authorities to stop doing that kind of testing since it is not properly certified.)Even those who have good reason to think they may be infected are being denied testing.The Grand Princess cruise had 21 people on board test positive for the coronavirus. After docking in Oakland, Calif., this week, passengers have been quarantined at military bases.Peggy Moy, 71, a retired nurse and passenger, is still waiting to be tested. She had a sore throat and stuffy nose during the cruise, which she reported, but by the time she left the ship, those symptoms had gone away.She is worried for her husband, who has lung cancer, and assumed, as other passengers had, that she would be tested as soon as she got to the base. So far that has not happened, though medical personnel have been taking their temperature twice a day.Not knowing is making Ms. Moy nervous, as hundreds of people from the ship, mostly older guests, are in quarantine on the base now, and many of them may have been exposed to the virus. People are wearing masks, she said, but are still mingling in common areas, like the lobby where people get coffee and water. They take off their masks to drink and eat.“I would like to know who among us is positive,” Ms. Moy said by telephone. “I don’t know. None of us know.”Yet for those who do manage to get tested, the experience can be byzantine. Andy Carvin, 48, a senior fellow at the Atlantic Council in Washington, went to the Howard County General Hospital in Maryland last Thursday with a persistent fever and cough following a meeting with foreign journalists in February.It started well. Health workers had cleared a path for him to walk to a back room. One doctor wore a large hooded mask and helmet and “looked like an Imperial Guard in ‘Star Wars.’”They ran several tests, including of his blood. They swabbed his nose and throat about 10 hours later. But then it took a week to get the results back.With no clear point of contact, Mr. Carvin made multiple calls — to the hospital, the state health department and two county health departments — to try to get the result. Three days later, he was told that one of the two swabs taken had never been sent to the state. At one point, he was given the wrong result. He called it “covid19purgatory.”On Thursday, he finally got the good news: negative.Reporting was contributed by Sabrina Tavernise from Washington; Sean Keenan from Atlanta; Patricia Mazzei from Miami; Wudan Yan from Seattle; Kate Taylor from Cambridge, Mass.; John Eligon and Thomas Fuller from San Francisco; Christopher Dixon from Charleston, S.C.; Campbell Robertson from Pittsburgh; and Vanessa Swales and Nicholas Bogel-Burroughs from New York.Advertisement