https://www.nytimes.com/2019/04/18/us/politics/mueller-report-russian-interference-donald-trump.html
Mueller Reveals Trump’s Efforts to Thwart Russian Inquiry in Highly Anticipated Report - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
64
AdvertisementSupported byBy Mark MazzettiWASHINGTON — Robert S. Mueller III revealed the scope of a historic Russian campaign to sabotage the 2016 presidential election in a much-anticipated report made public on Thursday, and he detailed a frantic monthslong effort by President Trump to thwart a federal investigation that imperiled his presidency from the start.Mr. Mueller, the special counsel, laid out how his team of prosecutors wrestled with whether Mr. Trump’s actions added up to a criminal obstruction-of-justice offense. They ultimately chose not to charge Mr. Trump, citing numerous legal and factual constraints, but pointedly declined to exonerate him and suggested that it might be the role of Congress to settle the matter.The report laid bare that Mr. Trump was elected with the help of a foreign power, and cataloged numerous meetings between Mr. Trump’s advisers and Russians seeking to influence the campaign and the presidential transition team — encounters set up in pursuit of business deals, policy initiatives and political dirt about Hillary Clinton, the Democratic candidate for president.The special counsel concluded that there was “insufficient evidence” to determine that the president or his aides had engaged in a criminal conspiracy with the Russians, even though the Trump campaign welcomed the Kremlin sabotage effort and “expected it would benefit electorally” from the hacks and leaks of Democratic emails.Then, after federal investigators opened an inquiry into the extraordinary Russian campaign, the president repeatedly tried to undermine it.“If we had confidence after a thorough investigation of the facts that the president clearly did not commit obstruction of justice, we would so state,” Mr. Mueller’s investigators wrote. “Based on the facts and the applicable legal standards, however, we are unable to reach that judgment.”Fevered speculation, now put to rest, arose in some circles that Mr. Trump and his immediate family might be in legal peril from Mr. Mueller’s investigation. At the same time, the report offered reams of evidence of a climate of deceit — and a base impulse for self-preservation — among a president and his top aides not seen since the days of Richard M. Nixon.That impulse prompted some presidential advisers to try to block Mr. Trump’s demands that they take steps to protect him from federal investigators. Some feared getting wrapped up in the widening inquiry.The findings from the special counsel, Robert S. Mueller III, are now available to the public. The redacted report details his two-year investigation into Russian interference in the 2016 presidential election.“The president’s efforts to influence the investigation were mostly unsuccessful, but that is largely because the persons who surrounded the president declined to carry out orders or accede to his requests,” the report said.The special counsel found that Mr. Trump had the authority to make many of his most controversial decisions, including the firing of James B. Comey as the F.B.I. director, by virtue of the powers the Constitution grants him. At the same time, it is a far more damning portrayal of his behavior than the one presented last month in a four-page letter released by Attorney General William P. Barr.“The incidents were often carried out through one-on-one meetings in which the president sought to use his official power outside of usual channels,” the report said. “These actions ranged from efforts to remove the special counsel and to reverse the effect of the attorney general’s recusal; to the attempted use of official power to limit the scope of the investigation; to direct and indirect contacts with witnesses with the potential to influence their testimony. Viewing the acts collectively can help to illuminate their significance.”In his letter, Mr. Barr announced that while Mr. Mueller had made no judgment about whether Mr. Trump had obstructed justice, he had stepped in to decide that the president had not.Mr. Barr defended his decision in a news conference on Thursday and said that some of the president’s actions were understandable given the “context” of his situation.“There is substantial evidence to show that the president was frustrated and angered by a sincere belief that the investigation was undermining his presidency, propelled by his political opponents and fueled by illegal leaks,” Mr. Barr said.The Mueller report is a sometimes gripping account of a presidency consumed by a sprawling investigation, and of a president seized by paranoia about what it might unearth.transcriptIt’s up. All right. It’s up. The report’s up. Sorry.From The New York Times, I’m Michael Barbaro. This is “The Daily.”O.K. Mike?Yeah.I want you to start on page 215 — “factual results of the obstruction investigation.”Today —Sharon, here’s what I want you to excerpt. I want you to start on page four. Nick, I want you to start at the bottom of page eight.448 pages, two years in the making.That’s new. We didn’t know that.What we learned from the Mueller report.That quote is new.It’s a pretty good quote.It’s Friday, April 19.Michael, can you hear us?Hey, Michael.Yeah.Hey, guys.Hey.Hey.All right. Mike Schmidt, Mark Mazzetti, it’s 9:15 on Thursday night. You’ve both now spent about 10 hours reading the Mueller report. Tell me about this thing.It’s a breathtaking document. It’s over 400 pages of detailed insights and accounts of enormous issues we’ve been focused on over the past two years. It’s divided into, essentially, two halves — one for Russia, one for the president’s actions in office.In other words, collusion and obstruction. Those are the two buckets.Right. The first half detailing the contact between Russians and Trump advisers isn’t enormously revealing, in the sense that we had already heard some weeks ago that there had not been a, quote, “criminal conspiracy” found by Mueller. At the same time, there’s an enormous amount of detail concluding that in the midst of this really historic effort by the Russians to sabotage the election — hacking and leaking of emails, social media manipulation, fake news — it says that the Trump campaign welcomed this. They saw a real benefit of what the Russians were doing, even if at the end of the day there wasn’t an active conspiracy.He’s essentially saying that they were interested, they sought out information about emails, they wanted to know more about how they could get their hands on these messages. They welcomed all this, but they never crossed the line into breaking the law. Just because they sought out the fruits of the Russian hack doesn’t mean that they were part of the crime.And just to be very clear, how is what you’re describing, collectively, not collusion?Well, I think we need to be careful, because the attorney general said that there was no collusion. And the president said there was no collusion. But the Mueller report is more nuanced. And the Mueller report says, you know, this “collusion” word doesn’t really mean anything to us. There’s no legal standard of collusion. So what we’re going to look at is what is a crime, and that is conspiracy. And that’s what we have to judge all of this voluminous evidence against. And they said that a conspiracy is two parties acting together in concert to break the law. And what Mueller is very clear about is that there is, quote, “insufficient evidence” of a conspiracy. He is not saying there was nothing. He is not saying full exoneration. But he’s saying there is insufficient evidence to meet the standard that he had established of a criminal conspiracy breaking the law.And what would Mueller have needed to see for this to add up to conspiracy?That would have looked like a conversation between the Trump campaign and the Russians where the Trump campaign was saying, hey guys, can you go break into the D.N.C. and steal some emails so we can then get them out and embarrass the Democrats and help us politically during the campaign? That would have gotten you down the conspiracy path. And they did not find that.O.K. So let’s talk about obstruction. Mike, last time we talked, a couple weeks back, Mueller had sent his report to Barr. And Barr had sent a summary of that report to Congress in advance of this full report. And the most confusing thing about that summary was that Mueller had not made a call on whether the evidence added up to obstruction of justice.And today, we get to see what Mueller’s explanation is for why he didn’t make a determination on whether the president broke the law. And it’s not clear-cut. What it essentially is is that the president, under Justice Department policy, cannot be indicted. And because the president cannot be indicted, it’s unfair to accuse him while he’s in office of breaking the law, because there’s no way for him to go to court to defend himself. So, dear American public, Mueller essentially says, I am not going to make a determination on that issue. That could be made after the president leaves office. But for now, that would be unfair. So what I will do is I will lay out for you what I found, what the potential obstruction was, why it may be illegal. And after the president leaves office, the Justice Department could make a determination that he indeed broke the law and bring a case. And at the end of explaining why a determination was not made, Mueller says, if we had confidence after a thorough investigation of the facts that the president clearly did not commit obstruction of justice, we would so state. Based on the facts and the applicable legal standards, however, we are unable to reach that judgment. So Mueller is basically saying, if we felt comfortable that the president had done nothing wrong, we would tell you. And we are not telling you that.Well, Mike, you mentioned the incidents that he was not going to use as a basis for charging the president, because he felt he couldn’t charge the president. What were those that he laid out in the report?Well, there’s about a dozen. And they follow in chronological order how Trump misled the public about his relationship with Russia, misled the public about his knowledge that Russia was behind the hacks. And as the presidency goes on and Mueller is appointed in May of 2017, right after he takes office, the president starts to sort of lose his grip as he tries to maintain control of the investigation. He was intent on using his power as the head of the executive branch to protect himself and use the tools at his disposal — the people running the Justice Department, the F.B.I., the intelligence community — to help protect him from this investigation.And what are some examples of that — specifics?Well, a lot of them are ones that we know well. The firing of James Comey. His efforts to get his attorney general, Jeff Sessions, to un-recuse himself from the Russia investigation, essentially reassert his control over something that he has stepped aside from because he has a conflict of interest. And when the president can’t get that done, he basically tries to get rid of Sessions and install a loyalist atop the Justice Department. These are things that had been reported in the press. We get a fuller, richer picture of them. And we really see what the president was saying behind closed doors and the immense pressure he was putting on people to try and use the system to protect himself from the system. But then we learn about incidents that we knew little about, like how the president went completely outside of his administration in government to Corey Lewandowski, his first campaign manager.Mm-hmm.And he leaned on Corey in the summer of 2017 to try and pressure Sessions, his attorney general. So here’s the president of the United States using someone who doesn’t even work for him to get to Sessions and try and get Sessions out there publicly to help clear Trump’s name. It’s just a remarkable way of using presidential power.Which suggests that the president was meeting resistance within his own administration, and therefore reached out to somebody who didn’t even work for the government to try to get him to achieve this end.I don’t think many in the public will want to hold up the president’s aides as heroes, and a lot of them are probably not. But there is a picture here of folks that stopped the president time and time again and thwarted him from doing things that may have actually gotten him into trouble, that may have crossed that line, that may have made a stronger argument for Mueller about why the president did obstruct justice. One of the most detailed ones is on Trump’s efforts to get rid of Mueller and how his White House counsel would not do that. He would not call the Justice Department on the president’s behalf and say Mueller has to be removed for what the White House counsel, Don McGahn, thought were some bogus reasons Trump had cooked up about why he didn’t like Mueller. And in the document, as Mueller is recounting what happened in this incident, there are Nixonian echoes. It says, on June 17, 2017, the president called McGahn at home and directed him to call the acting attorney general and say that the special counsel had conflicts of interest and must be removed. McGahn did not carry out the direction, however, deciding that he would resign rather than trigger what he regarded as a potential “Saturday Night Massacre” — a reference to when Richard Nixon fired the special counsel who was investigating him.I recognize that this question is a little bit meta, but if getting rid of Mueller had meant that the report was never completed, wouldn’t that have finally been obstruction of justice? Because, literally, an investigation was obstructed.There does seem to be a determination here about the success of the president’s efforts, or lack of success — that the fact that the Mueller investigation continued and finished means there is less of a case that the president obstructed justice. If there had been more of a Nixonian moment, where there was an 18-minute gap in tapes that were deliberately erased, that there was some tangible thing that had happened that had meant that prosecutors couldn’t get to the truth, there might possibly have been a different judgment and a different outcome.Right. I keep thinking of that 18-minute deletion when I think about Don McGahn. It’s as if nobody had ever said to Nixon what Don McGahn had said to President Trump — no, I’m not going to delete that tape. Sorry. But that’s what Don McGahn did to the president. That’s what happened with Trump over and over again.Because everyone has seen “All the President’s Men,” and they know what happens. And, you know, you don’t want to be the guy who carries out the “Saturday Night Massacre.”So the president really has these people around him to thank, in a lot of ways.At the end of the day, there were these folks that were not going to go that extra inch and go over the line for him. And it looks like those measures probably saved him.I mean, Mueller lays this point out explicitly. This is a quote from the report. “The president’s efforts to influence the investigation were mostly unsuccessful. But that is largely because the persons who surrounded the president declined to carry out orders or cede to his requests. Comey did not end the investigation of Flynn, which ultimately resulted in Flynn’s prosecution and conviction for lying to the F.B.I. McGahn did not tell the acting attorney general that the special counsel must be removed, but was instead prepared to resign over the president’s order. Lewandowski and Dearborn did not deliver the president’s message to Sessions that he should confine the Russian investigation to future election meddling only. And McGahn refused to recede from his recollections about events surrounding the president’s direction to have the special counsel removed, despite the president’s multiple demands to do so.”Hmm. And Mike, before seeing this report, our understanding of why Mueller may not have reached a conclusion on obstruction of justice was that obstruction has a lot to do with intent. Why did the president take the actions that he took? What did we learn from the report about how Mueller might have been thinking about that?We learn that the president was intent on ending the investigation into himself, but it’s less clear about what was truly motivating him.I guess I don’t quite understand that. If his intent is to end the investigation, how is that not obstruction of justice?This is the heart of this dispute right now.Yeah.It’s a clash of two theories. I mean, Mueller’s team clearly indicated that the actions come up to the line of obstruction of justice — that the intent to end the investigation to preserve his presidency does, in fact, approach something that is criminal obstruction of justice, even if they did not make that determination. The rub here is that it is at odds with the theory of Robert Mueller’s boss, Attorney General Barr. He got the job of attorney general, some say, based on his theory that the president can’t really obstruct justice. Barr says, today, in his press conference —President Trump faced an unprecedented situation. As he entered into office and sought to perform his responsibilities as president, federal agents and prosecutors were scrutinizing his conduct before and after taking office.At the heart of a obstruction of justice investigation is whether that person has corrupt intent. And his determination is that the president didn’t. And in a way, this big debate over the intent of the president — Barr kind of goes out of his way today to fill in the blanks, to sort of say, well, let’s look at the president’s intent.At the same time, there was relentless speculation in the news media about the president’s personal culpability. Yet, as he said from the beginning, there was, in fact, no collusion.The president felt that this was consuming his presidency.There is substantial evidence to show that the president was frustrated and angered by his sincere belief that the investigation was undermining his presidency, propelled by his political opponents, and fueled by illegal leaks. Nonetheless, the White House fully cooperated with the special counsel’s investigation.Yeah. He wanted this thing over. So in a way, what was one of the things that was so extraordinary about Barr’s press conference was that he explains the president’s reasoning in a way that the president hasn’t himself.So Barr would say that trying to end the investigation to protect the presidency is not corrupt motive. In fact, in his telling, it’s arguably even important, maybe even a little bit noble. It’s in the best interest of the American people.Perhaps patriotic.Hmm.So there’s this totally compelling moment in the middle of the report that paints a scene of the president being told that a special counsel had just been appointed. And I’ll quote directly from the report. “The president slumped back in his chair and said, ‘Oh, my God. This is terrible. This is the end of my presidency. I’m fucked.’ The president became angry and lambasted the attorney general for his decision to recuse from the investigation, stating, ‘How could you let this happen, Jeff?’ The president said the position of attorney general was his most important appointment, and that Sessions had, quote, ‘let him down,’ contrasting him with Eric Holder and Robert Kennedy. Sessions recalled that the president said to him, ‘You were supposed to protect me,’ or words to that effect. The president returned to the consequences of the appointment and said, ‘Everyone tells me if you get one of these independent counsels, it ruins your presidency. It takes years and years, and I won’t be able to do anything. This is the worst thing that ever happened to me.’” The way this passage reads is the president’s anger about the appointment of a special counsel comes mostly from the recognition that it’s going to imperil his presidency. It means nothing will get done. It means that he’s going to spend the rest of his term fighting it. It’s not because he’s worried that Robert Mueller might find something that will one day land Donald Trump in jail. That’s one reading of this passage that would bolster the argument made by the attorney general that the president faced this extraordinary situation.I don’t think that makes any sense. Or at least I don’t understand it. I don’t understand how the attorney general can say there’s no issue of an underlying crime here when Donald Trump is sitting there acknowledging the potential threat from the depth and breadth of a special counsel’s investigation. He knew at that point, in May of 2017, that he had had his personal lawyer, Michael Cohen, make hush money payments to women. Donald Trump was smart enough to know that a special counsel — like in Bill Clinton or any other presidency — rummages around on one issue and ends up on another. And what happens? Mueller finds these weird transactions. He refers it to another U.S. attorney’s office. And the president is ultimately in a completely separate investigation, named as an unindicted co-conspirator.Hmm.How is there not an underlying crime that Donald Trump was afraid about? In July of 2017, myself and two colleagues go into the Oval Office to interview the president. He says, if Mueller looks at my finances, it’s crossing a red line. So what were Trump’s motivations for getting rid of Mueller? Was he really worried about Russia? Or was he worried that, hey, if this guy rummages around on Russia, he’s going to find something else? Indeed, he did.So Mike, you’re saying that Barr’s argument — that the president is just protecting the presidency — doesn’t really hold up. Because we know for a fact that the president understood, at this point, that when he says, I’m effed, that he has these payments made in coordination with Michael Cohen to these women as hush money, which have nothing to do with the Russia investigation, but which obviously could be incredibly damaging to him, and maybe even criminal.Look, no one has questioned the president about this in a law enforcement setting. I don’t know exactly what the president’s intentions were, but the idea that there was no underlying criminality in Donald Trump’s life in May of 2017, when Mueller got appointed, is bogus. Because there was. Further, in December of 2017, there is a report out there that Mueller has subpoenaed the president’s bank records.Mm-hmm.Before the president’s lawyers are able to get the message to him that the report is wrong, he starts telling White House aides that Mueller has to go.Hmm.I do think there’s a decent case to be made that there were underlying issues of criminality within his life. The Justice Department has said that itself.O.K. So regardless of the president’s intent, is it important whether or not he was successful in impeding this investigation, in thinking about the question of obstruction of justice?Well, I think for the folks at the Justice Department who had to make the call about whether the president broke the law, one of the factors that played into their declination decision was the fact that when you looked at the investigation, the efforts that the president took did not significantly damage the inquiry.Right.Despite the president’s best efforts, he was not very good at obstructing justice.Right. The existence of the Mueller report today suggests that the investigation did not get obstructed.Despite all of Donald Trump’s huffing and puffing and trying to get this person to do this and this person to do that, Bob Mueller moved ahead unimpeded for two years, finished his investigation, and the entire country got to see the fruits of it. Show us where the obstruction is, is what the president’s defenders would say.We’ll be right back. So finally, I want to talk about Bill Barr’s role in all this. Because the position of many Democrats today was that Barr — in reaching a decision on obstruction of justice where Mueller did not, in holding a press conference ahead of the report’s release seeming to defend the president, all taken together — has undermined any credibility that he had, and that Democrats and the country need to see for themselves what Mueller had found. How are you thinking about Barr in this moment, having now spent time with the Mueller report?I mean, the one thing is clear is that this has been a lot of red meat for Democrats in Congress to keep investigating. And one of the things that they’re going to keep investigating is Barr’s role in this entire process. They are going to try to get him up to testify. They are going to try to get more underlying documents in the Mueller investigation. They now see Barr as a clear target for them. I think a lot of people, because of all these actions, have a much different picture of the attorney general than they did a month or two ago.And they’re going to try to understand the differences between what Bob Mueller thinks about all this — the supposedly nonpartisan figure — and what Bill Barr thinks about this — the presidential appointee whose allegiances are clearly closer to the president.There’s one answer to this. And that is that after this entire investigation in which Bob Mueller has said nothing publicly, including today, when there was a press conference held to talk about his report, we need to hear from Bob Mueller. We need for him to explain to us more how they came to this determination that they couldn’t say whether the president violated the law or not. Does Mueller think that Barr has misrepresented some of his findings? What was his relationship with the Justice Department? Did he believe that Congress should deal with this issue and that Barr shouldn’t have made a call on whether the president violated the law? We need to hear from Mueller. We have never heard his voice in the past two years.So inadvertently, in seeming to protect the president and not be representing Mueller, Bill Barr may be extending Democrats’ interest in this investigation and the trouble for the president.Absolutely. If you look back at what Barr has done in the last month, this could have turned out differently for him — if he had put out the report immediately after the letter or as soon after the letter as he could have, if he had characterized the report differently in that four-page letter, and if he hadn’t had a press conference on the day of the release before anyone had seen the report that had this appearance of trying to spin it for the president and protect the president. That seems to have created more problems both for Barr and the president than if they had just released the report.Mark, thank you very much. Mike, thank you very much.Thank you.Thanks for having us.“The Daily” is made by Theo Balcomb, Andy Mills, Lisa Tobin, Rachel Quester, Lynsea Garrison, Annie Brown, Clare Toeniskoetter, Paige Cowett, Michael Simon Johnson, Brad Fisher, Larissa Anderson, Wendy Dorr, Chris Wood, Jessica Cheung, Alexandra Leigh Young, Jonathan Wolfe, Lisa Chow, Eric Krupke and Marc Georges. Our theme music is by Jim Brunberg and Ben Landsverk of Wonderly. Special thanks to Sam Dolnick, Mikayla Bouchard, Stella Tan, Julia Simon and Samantha Henig.That’s it for “The Daily.” I’m Michael Barbaro. See you on Monday.Immediately after learning that a special counsel had been appointed to lead the Russia investigation, the report said, Mr. Trump became distraught and slumped in his chair.“Oh, my God. This is terrible,” he said. “This is the end of my presidency. I’m fucked.”Mr. Trump had long denounced the inquiry as a politically motivated “witch hunt.” But since it began, a half-dozen former Trump aides have been indicted or convicted of crimes, most of them for lying to Congress or federal investigators.Last month’s release of Mr. Mueller’s primary conclusions seemed to blunt any momentum on Capitol Hill to initiate impeachment proceedings against Mr. Trump, and it appeared unlikely then that the far more detailed accounting of the special counsel’s work would change that dynamic.But on Thursday, top Democratic lawmakers seized on the report’s findings and suggested that the issue of impeachment was not settled. At the very least, Mr. Mueller’s report seems certain to give Democratic lawmakers — and the many Democratic presidential candidates — ample political fodder for attacks on the president until he stands for re-election late next year.The release is the culmination of an investigation that consumed the national political conversation for nearly two years and was freighted with the outsize expectations of Mr. Trump’s most fervent critics.Mr. Mueller achieved a cult status among some Americans obsessed with the prospect that he might deliver a report that would put the Trump presidency in jeopardy — an image fueled by his general refusal to give public signals about the direction of his investigation. Mr. Mueller and his staff seemed monkish and enigmatic, choosing to speak only in court appearances and highly detailed indictments of Russian intelligence operatives or some of the president’s advisers.Some Americans invested so much hope in the Mueller investigation that they made plans to hold rallies in predetermined locations if Mr. Trump fired the special counsel and terminated the investigation. He never did.The Mueller investigation began in May 2017, but its origins go back nearly a year earlier. The F.B.I. opened the original inquiry into possible ties between the Trump campaign and Russia on July 31, 2016, in the midst of a heated presidential election contest that, the world now knows, Moscow made a concerted effort to sabotage.That summer saw WikiLeaks release thousands of hacked emails meant to cripple Mrs. Clinton’s candidacy, and American intelligence and law enforcement officials saw other ominous signs of Russian attempts to subvert the election.Determining the scope of the Russian interference campaign was a centerpiece of the Mueller investigation, and will most likely be one of its enduring legacies. His report leaves no doubt that it was the Russian government that orchestrated the effort, and that many of Mr. Trump’s aides welcomed it — even if they did not actively coordinate with Moscow.At the very least, in the face of a Russian intelligence effort to make contact with Mr. Trump’s advisers, none of the advisers thought to contact the F.B.I.More than two years of criminal indictments and steady revelations about Trump campaign contacts with Russians reveal the scope of the special counsel investigation.When Mr. Mueller began his work, there were still prominent voices at both ends of the political spectrum openly debating whether the hacking and leaking of emails — and the fake news that spread like a wildfire on social media in the months before the election — was the work of Russia, China, stateless hackers or, as Mr. Trump once liked to say, “someone sitting on their bed that weighs 400 pounds.”Even last summer, standing next to President Vladimir V. Putin of Russia after a summit meeting in Finland, Mr. Trump refused to accept that the Russians had carried out the election sabotage.Now, the voices of doubt have mostly been silenced, in part because of two indictments Mr. Mueller secured last year against a total of 25 Russian military intelligence operatives and experts in social media manipulation. The indictments gave exquisite details about the entirety of the Russian operation — how Russians paid unsuspecting Americans to stage pro-Trump rallies in battleground states, how Russian hackers penetrated the personal email account of Mrs. Clinton’s campaign chairman and how a pair of Russian women took a scouting trip to the United States two years before the election to gather information for the planned assault.Just weeks into his presidency, Mr. Trump declared there had been no meetings or other communications during the campaign between his advisers and Russians or other Kremlin intermediaries. A parade of news media reports followed saying otherwise — reports that the White House denounced at the time as false but that Mr. Mueller’s report showed to be accurate.One of the most significant was a June 2016 meeting at Trump Tower set up by Donald Trump Jr., the president’s eldest son, and a group of Russians who had promised political dirt about Mrs. Clinton.When The New York Times revealed the meeting a year later, there was a frenzied effort by the president’s aides to mislead the public about its purpose — including putting out a news release that the meeting had primarily been about a Russian adoption program.The report stated that Mr. Trump’s personal lawyer “repeatedly and inaccurately denied that the president played any role in drafting Trump Jr.’s statement,” and that the special counsel investigated whether that meeting violated campaign finance laws. Mr. Mueller’s team found that the evidence was “not sufficient.”Some of the meetings with Russians were a mélange of business and politics, and Mr. Mueller’s prosecutors wrapped up their inquiry still puzzled about their purpose.In December 2016, for instance, the head of a Russian bank under sanctions met in New York with Jared Kushner, the president’s son-in law and senior adviser. Mr. Kushner told the special counsel it was a diplomatic meeting with a person close to Mr. Putin set to discuss the future of relations between the United States and Russia.The Russian banker, Sergey N. Gorkov, has given a different account of the meeting’s purpose: to sit down with Mr. Kushner, the scion of a New York real estate empire, for business purposes.In the end, the special counsel’s team “did not resolve the apparent conflicts in the accounts,” according to the report.Mr. Trump declared victory last month when Mr. Barr sent the four-page letter to Congress outlining the investigation’s main conclusions.“After three years of lies and smears and slander, the Russia hoax is finally dead,” Mr. Trump told thousands of his supporters at a Michigan rally days after Mr. Barr’s letter was made public. “Robert Mueller was a god to the Democrats. He was a god to them until he said ‘no collusion.’ They don’t like him so much now.”Even so, the revelations in Mr. Barr’s letter did not produce a noticeable bump in Mr. Trump’s approval rating, and polls taken in the weeks since Mr. Barr’s letter have shown that many Americans were reserving judgment until they had a fuller picture of Mr. Mueller’s conclusions.Other Americans made up their minds long ago, and it is unclear what the effect will be of the release of hundreds of pages of investigative conclusions by a team of seasoned prosecutors. Those already convinced that the investigation was a witch hunt, and those already convinced that Mr. Trump conspired with Russia to win the presidency, are unlikely to be moved by the conclusions of Mr. Mueller and his team.Mr. Mueller’s byzantine investigation amassed information from thousands of subpoenas, hundreds of search warrants and evidence turned over from more than a dozen foreign governments.The report released on Thursday revealed that his team of prosecutors had found enough evidence of potential crimes to make 14 different criminal referrals to other federal prosecutors.So far, only two of those have officially been made public.Advertisement