https://www.nytimes.com/2020/04/28/business/jetblue-face-masks-coronavirus.html
JetBlue Is the First Major U.S. Airline to Require Masks for Passengers - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
330
AdvertisementSupported byThe airline will require all passengers to wear a face covering from the beginning to the end of their trip. The policy takes effect Monday.By Johnny DiazJetBlue will require passengers to wear face coverings starting next week, becoming the first major American airline to compel its customers to cover their noses and mouths since the start of the coronavirus outbreak.The policy, which takes effect Monday, covers the duration of a passenger’s flight, from check-in through boarding and deplaning, the airline said.“Wearing a face covering isn’t about protecting yourself, it’s about protecting those around you,” Joanna Geraghty, JetBlue’s president and chief operating officer, said in a statement. “This is the new flying etiquette. Onboard, cabin air is well circulated and cleaned through filters every few minutes, but this is a shared space where we have to be considerate of others.”JetBlue already had been requiring its crew members to wear face coverings while on duty. The airline said it modeled its new policy on a recommendation from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention that people cover their noses and mouths in public to help slow the spread of the coronavirus.JetBlue referred to the C.D.C.’s definition of a face covering as a cloth that should fit snugly against the side of a person’s face, is secured with ties or ear loops, and includes “multiple layers of fabric for unrestricted breathing.” The C.D.C. recommends that surgical masks and N95 respirators be reserved for health care workers and other medical professionals.The company said it would remind passengers of the new policy before their flight by email and through announcements and signage at airports. Small children who are not able to wear a face covering are exempt from the requirement, the airline said.Sara Nelson, the president of the Association of Flight Attendants, applauded JetBlue’s new policy.“Good job, JetBlue, for being the first U.S. airline to take this responsible step, which the C.D.C. advises will help slow the spread of the virus,” she said in a statement.Her union has been pushing for the Department of Transportation, in coordination with the Department of Health and Human Services, to require masks for airline crews and passengers, and it has been urging people to fly as little as possible during the pandemic.“Most U.S. airlines are now requiring flight attendants to wear a mask while working,” she said, “but we need passengers to wear masks in order to best protect everyone onboard, including crew.”“In the meantime,” she added, “we encourage all passengers to voluntarily wear a face covering while traveling.”Many passengers have been wearing masks, but some travelers have been sharing images on social media suggesting that the precaution was not being universally followed.United Airlines announced last week that it was requiring masks for its flight attendants and that it would provide masks for customers starting in early May. And Delta announced on Monday that it was requiring its employees to wear masks or face coverings when they are “unable to maintain at least six feet” of distance from another employee or customer.“We will continue to make masks and face coverings available to employees, and you are also free to use your own face covering,” Delta said in a memo to employees on Monday.“We are strongly encouraging customers to wear masks, too, and we plan to make them available,” a Delta spokesman, Morgan Durrant, said in an email.Updated May 28, 2020States are reopening bit by bit. This means that more public spaces are available for use and more and more businesses are being allowed to open again. The federal government is largely leaving the decision up to states, and some state leaders are leaving the decision up to local authorities. Even if you aren’t being told to stay at home, it’s still a good idea to limit trips outside and your interaction with other people.Touching contaminated objects and then infecting ourselves with the germs is not typically how the virus spreads. But it can happen. A number of studies of flu, rhinovirus, coronavirus and other microbes have shown that respiratory illnesses, including the new coronavirus, can spread by touching contaminated surfaces, particularly in places like day care centers, offices and hospitals. But a long chain of events has to happen for the disease to spread that way. The best way to protect yourself from coronavirus — whether it’s surface transmission or close human contact — is still social distancing, washing your hands, not touching your face and wearing masks.Common symptoms include fever, a dry cough, fatigue and difficulty breathing or shortness of breath. Some of these symptoms overlap with those of the flu, making detection difficult, but runny noses and stuffy sinuses are less common. The C.D.C. has also added chills, muscle pain, sore throat, headache and a new loss of the sense of taste or smell as symptoms to look out for. Most people fall ill five to seven days after exposure, but symptoms may appear in as few as two days or as many as 14 days.If air travel is unavoidable, there are some steps you can take to protect yourself. Most important: Wash your hands often, and stop touching your face. If possible, choose a window seat. A study from Emory University found that during flu season, the safest place to sit on a plane is by a window, as people sitting in window seats had less contact with potentially sick people. Disinfect hard surfaces. When you get to your seat and your hands are clean, use disinfecting wipes to clean the hard surfaces at your seat like the head and arm rest, the seatbelt buckle, the remote, screen, seat back pocket and the tray table. If the seat is hard and nonporous or leather or pleather, you can wipe that down, too. (Using wipes on upholstered seats could lead to a wet seat and spreading of germs rather than killing them.)More than 40 million people — the equivalent of 1 in 4 U.S. workers — have filed for unemployment benefits since the pandemic took hold. One in five who were working in February reported losing a job or being furloughed in March or the beginning of April, data from a Federal Reserve survey released on May 14 showed, and that pain was highly concentrated among low earners. Fully 39 percent of former workers living in a household earning $40,000 or less lost work, compared with 13 percent in those making more than $100,000, a Fed official said.There is an uptick in people reporting symptoms of chilblains, which are painful red or purple lesions that typically appear in the winter on fingers or toes. The lesions are emerging as yet another symptom of infection with the new coronavirus. Chilblains are caused by inflammation in small blood vessels in reaction to cold or damp conditions, but they are usually common in the coldest winter months. Federal health officials do not include toe lesions in the list of coronavirus symptoms, but some dermatologists are pushing for a change, saying so-called Covid toe should be sufficient grounds for testing.Yes, but make sure you keep six feet of distance between you and people who don’t live in your home. Even if you just hang out in a park, rather than go for a jog or a walk, getting some fresh air, and hopefully sunshine, is a good idea.Taking one’s temperature to look for signs of fever is not as easy as it sounds, as “normal” temperature numbers can vary, but generally, keep an eye out for a temperature of 100.5 degrees Fahrenheit or higher. If you don’t have a thermometer (they can be pricey these days), there are other ways to figure out if you have a fever, or are at risk of Covid-19 complications.The C.D.C. has recommended that all Americans wear cloth masks if they go out in public. This is a shift in federal guidance reflecting new concerns that the coronavirus is being spread by infected people who have no symptoms. Until now, the C.D.C., like the W.H.O., has advised that ordinary people don’t need to wear masks unless they are sick and coughing. Part of the reason was to preserve medical-grade masks for health care workers who desperately need them at a time when they are in continuously short supply. Masks don’t replace hand washing and social distancing.If you’ve been exposed to the coronavirus or think you have, and have a fever or symptoms like a cough or difficulty breathing, call a doctor. They should give you advice on whether you should be tested, how to get tested, and how to seek medical treatment without potentially infecting or exposing others.If you’re sick and you think you’ve been exposed to the new coronavirus, the C.D.C. recommends that you call your healthcare provider and explain your symptoms and fears. They will decide if you need to be tested. Keep in mind that there’s a chance — because of a lack of testing kits or because you’re asymptomatic, for instance — you won’t be able to get tested.Charity Navigator, which evaluates charities using a numbers-based system, has a running list of nonprofits working in communities affected by the outbreak. You can give blood through the American Red Cross, and World Central Kitchen has stepped in to distribute meals in major cities.American Airlines also announced on Monday that flight attendants on its domestic and international flights would be required to wear masks starting Friday.Although American Airlines does not require passengers to wear masks, the company plans to provide them with masks starting in May. The company also tells passengers that they may be required by local law “to wear one in the airport where your trip begins, where it ends or where you connect.”Since late March, JetBlue has limited the number of seats for sale on most flights to allow for more space between passengers who are not traveling together, the company said.Last month, American Airlines announced that it would not be assigning 50 percent of main-cabin middle seats or seats near flight attendant jump seats.United and Delta are also blocking sales of middle seats.“These mitigation measures are the latest steps in our broader efforts to help ensure a safe environment for our customers and our employees, in the air and at the airport,” said Nicole Carriere, a United spokeswoman.Niraj Chokshi contributed reporting.Advertisement