https://www.nytimes.com/2020/03/22/us/politics/coronavirus-trump-wartime-president.html
‘Wartime President’? Trump Rewrites History in an Election Year - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
300
AdvertisementSupported byNews AnalysisThe president is brazenly grabbing his only clear option to bolster his re-election hopes, portraying himself as a take-charge leader the country can’t afford to lose.By Annie Karni, Maggie Haberman and Reid J. EpsteinWASHINGTON — With the economy faltering and the political landscape unsettled as the coronavirus death toll climbs, a stark and unavoidable question now confronts President Trump and his advisers: Can he save his campaign for re-election when so much is suddenly going so wrong?After three years of Republicans’ championing signs of financial prosperity that were to be Mr. Trump’s chief re-election argument, the president has never needed a new message to voters as he does now, not to mention luck. At this point, the president has one clear option for how to proceed politically, and is hoping that an array of factors will break his way.The option, which he has brazenly pushed in recent days, is to cast himself as a “wartime president” who looks in charge of a nation under siege while his likely Democratic opponent, former Vice President Joseph R. Biden Jr., is largely out of sight hunkered down in Delaware. This gambit, however, requires a rewriting of history — Mr. Trump’s muted approach to the virus early on — and it’s far from clear if many voters will accept the idea of him as a wartime leader.Then there are other variables that he and his allies hope will fall in their favor: that the outbreak of the virus will slow and, in the warmer months, dissipate; that the states will get it under control; that the federal government’s steps taken so far will flatten the curve; that Mr. Biden and the Democrats will look impotent and inconsequential by comparison; and that enough voters will move past his initial efforts to play down the virus’s dangers.The great unknown, of course — and the tremendous risk to Mr. Trump’s political fate, no matter what he says or does — is that the human cost, the economic toll, and the longevity and course of the pandemic are all X factors that will most likely play out for months and could be strongly salient if not severe by the time of the November general election.In perhaps the best-case scenario for Mr. Trump, the patina of a “wartime president” could prove to be influential with casual voters who don’t dig into the details of his belated response to the coronavirus, which included dismissing the criticism of his handling of the threat as a Democratic “hoax” and contributing to a slow start in testing for the virus.“He is counting on people being so traumatized on a day-to-day basis that they will forget his inaction,” said Douglas Brinkley, a professor of history at Rice University. “It’s better for him to be a wartime commander in chief than someone who, when the big crisis hit, misread it completely.”Politically, Mr. Brinkley said, the new posture made sense. “He can claim credit for the curve flattening at some point,” he said, “and hope people will be afraid to push a leader out of office if the crisis pushes into the fall.”The president’s course correction showed some quick results that were seized on by his political advisers. An ABC News poll released last week showed that 55 percent of Americans approved of Mr. Trump’s response to the pandemic, up from 43 percent the week before.Rarely have incumbent presidents seen their arguments for re-election evaporate so quickly. Mr. Trump and his advisers had planned to argue that the strong economy warranted a second term and that supporters and detractors alike wanted their 401(k)’s in the Trump-era stock market; that has now become an impossible sell. And as the administration negotiates an enormous bailout package with Congress for multiple industries, his strategy of caricaturing Democrats as “socialists” is not tenable either.So Mr. Trump is trying to mount a new version of his old argument: that “I alone can fix it,” as he said at the 2016 Republican convention about the nation’s problems. He is counting on enough voters believing they have to stick by a leader in the midst of an immense global crisis.Addressing fearful Americans, Mr. Trump said on Sunday evening: “You have a leader that will always fight for you and I will not stop until we win. This is going to be a victory.” He added at another point, “No American is alone as long as we’re united.”But shortly after reading his new script on Sunday night, Mr. Trump mocked Senator Mitt Romney of Utah for self-quarantining. “Romney’s in isolation? Gee, that’s too bad,” he said sarcastically at the briefing room podium.Mr. Trump is on uncertain political ground. His poll numbers in critical swing states like Pennsylvania and Michigan have been wavering, with most surveys showing him behind Mr. Biden and Senator Bernie Sanders of Vermont.Republican officials are banking on voters seeing him as take-charge in contrast to Mr. Biden and Mr. Sanders, who have been following the government’s guidance about staying indoors but have not yet found memorable ways to show how they would lead in this crisis.Mr. Biden and Mr. Sanders have held news conferences from remote locations, and Mr. Biden has participated in “virtual” fund-raisers. While Mr. Biden has an all but insurmountable lead in the race for the Democratic nomination, he has no real ability to steer events because he is not officially the presumptive nominee, and therefore is not the head of the party either.As a result, Mr. Biden finds himself with far fewer options than Mr. Trump or Democratic governors like Andrew M. Cuomo of New York, who have real authority and are holding news conferences often broadcast live.In turn, Republican officials and Sanders allies are pushing out attacks on Mr. Biden’s low profile, asking “Where’s Joe?” in emails to supporters and the news media. (A spokesman, T.J. Ducklo, said Sunday that Mr. Biden had not been tested for the virus because he had shown no symptoms.)transcriptFrom The New York Times, I’m Michael Barbaro. This is “The Daily.”Last week, President Trump sounded newly serious about combating the coronavirus, calling himself a quote, “wartime president.” Maggie Haberman on why days later, and with the situation only worsening, the president is abandoning that message.It’s Wednesday, March 25.Hello, guys.Hi.Hi.Maggie, it is Tuesday afternoon. Can you tell us about what just happened on the Fox News Channel?Over the next two hours, the president, the vice president, and the officials tasked with leading our nation’s response on the virus pandemic will join us to answer your questions all across America.We just saw Vice President Mike Pence and President Trump sit for two hours at a town hall meeting — virtual town hall meeting — with Fox News from the White House, where they took questions by remote.I think a lot of us right now are just wondering, what is the potential for a national stay-at-home order? Is this something that America could be seeing in our near future?Pence answered a bunch of questions first.Carly, I can tell you that at no point has the White House coronavirus task force discussed what some people call a nationwide lockdown.Then, President Trump came on for the second hour.Our people are full of vim and vigor and energy. They don’t want to be locked into a house or an apartment or some space. It’s not for our country. We’re not — we’re not built that way.And his message was even louder of a message that he’s been delivering for the last day or so, which is that while we have to take the coronavirus seriously —You know, I don’t want the cure to be worse than the problem itself.— in his words, the cure can’t be worse than the disease.— the problem being, obviously, the problem. And you know, you can destroy a country this way by closing it down.And by that, he means that the hits to the economy are becoming unsustainable. That it can’t go on forever.You’re going to lose people. You’re going to have suicides by the thousands. You’re going to have all sorts of things happen. You’re going to have instability. You can’t just come in and say, let’s close up the United States of America, the biggest, the most successful country in the world by far.And then he broke some news.I’d love to have it open by Easter. OK? I would love to have it open by Easter.Oh wow, OK.And that news was that he believes that by April 12, which is Easter, that that could be when the country and its economy are reopened.It’s such an important day for other reasons, but I’ll make it an important day for this, too. I would love to have the country opened up and just raring to go by Easter.Maggie, this seems very much at odds with the messaging coming from more local leaders and health officials in the areas of the U.S. that have been most directly hit by this pandemic so far. I’m thinking, for example, of the governor of New York, Andrew Cuomo, who was warning New York residents —Look, this can go on for several months, OK?— that they should be preparing for four, six —— eight months, nine months.Nine months of life under isolation and shutdown to fight the coronavirus.Michael, about half an hour or so before Mike Pence started this town hall —You have 20,000 ventilators in the stockpile. Release the ventilators to New York.— Andrew Cuomo was pleading with the federal government to send more resources, especially ventilators, because the number of cases that are severe in New York is growing and keeps getting bigger and bigger. And it is outpacing the number of materials that they have for doctors to treat them.I need the ventilators in 14 days. Only the federal government has that power.You have health officials in New York, health officials in California, health officials in President Trump’s own government saying we are not just a mere two or three weeks away from things going back to normal. And they’re basing that not just on idle projections, but watching what those curves have looked like in terms of the spread of the virus.Also, Maggie, help us understand how we got here and why this is the message from the president at this critical moment — when how we respond, what measures we take, and how long we take those measures really matters. And so I wonder where you think that starts. Where do we begin to understand that?Michael, you need to go back to January 22 when the president was in Davos for the World Economic Forum.It’s great to see you. Thank you for joining us again in Davos. We’ve done this before.That’s right.And he did an interview with CNBC. And at that point, the virus was already in the U.S.The C.D.C. has identified a case of coronavirus in Washington state.And he was asked by the interviewer if he was concerned that this could become a pandemic.Have you been briefed by the C.D.C.?I have.Are there worries about a pandemic at this point?No, we’re not at all.And the president’s response was, no, not at all.It’s one person coming in from China, and we have it under control. It’s going to be just fine.OK.He didn’t want to talk about it publicly at the time.And why do you think that was?Well, according to a number of people who were in contact with him, it was because he didn’t want to rattle the financial markets. That he was hoping that it was going to stay under control, and the stock markets are his political weathervane, and he thinks they need to stay up in order for him to win re-election. And he didn’t want to do anything to disturb that. And he didn’t want to create a panic.OK. So what happened next?So after that, a couple of days later, as there were more cases and it was clear that it was spreading out of China — where it originated — the president took this move that he was widely criticized for by Democrats and even some Republicans at the time. Which was he halted a number of flights from China into the U.S.Disney’s closed.Yeah.Movie theaters are closed. Hospitals being built. I think we’re now up to our eighth case in the United States. How concerned are you?Well, we pretty much shut it down coming in from China.The idea was to halt the spread of the disease, keep transmissions to a minimum. He was accused of xenophobia. He was accused of making a racist move. At the end of the day, it was probably effective, because it did actually take a pretty aggressive measure against the spread of the virus. The problem is, it was one of the last things that he did for several weeks.Hmm. So the right decision in retrospect, but not accompanied by similar actions that might have contained transmission.That’s exactly right. In the same way that George W. Bush was criticized for his “Mission Accomplished” banner about Iraq, the president treated that moment as if it was his mission accomplished moment. He did not do anything after that in terms of alerting the public, or telling people to be safe, or telling people to take precautions. And it basically squandered several weeks within the U.S.Right. Looking back at the timeline, we can now see that on the same day that the president stopped those flights from China, the coronavirus was already being reported by the W.H.O. in Japan and South Korea, and those countries are still sending their citizens to the United States on flights that have not been stopped. So the horse is out of the barn.Exactly. It was not anything close to a “whole-of-government approach.” And at that point, there was a task force that was formed, and it was being led by the health and human services secretary, Alex Azar. But it was outside of the White House, and it was rife with all kinds of turf battles. And the president, meanwhile, was still trying not to talk about it.And succeeding in that, for the most part.And succeeding in that, for the most part. It was not something that came up in interviews that he did, which were mostly with friendly interviewers who weren’t going to ask him things that he didn’t want to talk about. And look, it’s not as if it wasn’t getting news coverage. The New York Times had it on the front page almost every day from the end of January. It was very clear that this was a global crisis, but it was not being treated as an American crisis. And I think a lot of that is because the president just was not talking about it.And do we know what information the president is receiving during this time? Is he getting a bunch of briefings — one would think he would be — that are conveying the seriousness of the approaching situation?There’s conflicting information, Michael, about exactly how specific and how alarmed the briefing materials the president was receiving were at this time. We understand that a lot of folks in the National Security Council were taking it very seriously, and that information had been passed to him. We understand that Alex Azar, the health and human services secretary, took it very seriously, but it’s not clear that he was sharing all of that with the president or that he was being allowed to tell it to the president. There were some people in the White House who viewed Alex Azar in particular as quote-unquote “alarmist” — thought that he was overstating the threat. And when the president doesn’t want to take something particularly seriously, he’ll often poll test advisers until he finds the one who agrees with him that he shouldn’t take it seriously. And I have every reason to believe that he was looking for people to affirm his sense that this didn’t really need to be addressed. And one of the places that he would go to hear his own thoughts affirmed or for solace was Fox News.If you’ve ever had a question whether the mainstream media distorts, whips up, throw things out of focus or has an agenda, especially when it comes to the Trump administration, look no further than coronavirus.They were very much echoing what he believed and wanted to believe, which was that the criticisms about inactivity that he wasn’t doing enough was all part of an effort to harm him.This is yet another attempt to impeach the president. And sadly, it seems they care very little for any of the destruction they are leaving in their wake — losses in the stock market. All this, unfortunately, just part of the political casualties for them.At this point, the president is in India being fitted by Prime Minister Modi, and public health officials start basically taking matters into their own hands. They start giving public warnings. One top health expert gave a press briefing where she said that —Now, it’s not so much a question of if this will happen anymore, but rather more a question of exactly when this will happen.It was no longer a question of if the virus would spread in the United States, but when.And how many people in this country will become infected, and how many of those will develop severe or more complicated disease.And that hospitals and businesses and schools should start making preparations accordingly.Right.This was as the president was now on his way back from India, and the stock market reacted terribly to these warnings. And the president was furious. He called the health and human services secretary, saying that the remarks had rattled people. He called one of his top economic advisers, Larry Kudlow, wondering what could be done to stop the slide. But at this point, as angry as the president was, it was clear to him and to his advisers that this was no longer something he could ignore.We’ll be right back.So Maggie, what happens once the president recognizes that this is something that has to be addressed?The president put Vice President Mike Pence in charge of the task force.Good afternoon. We just completed today’s lengthy meeting of the White House coronavirus task force.And that was a big moment, because this task force that had been kind of diffuse and fighting with itself was for the first time being run from the White House. And it was meant to signal that the president was taking this seriously. So Mike Pence had control of this thing for basically two weeks. And during that time —We’re continuing to lean into this effort in full partnership with state and local health authorities around the country —— he was trying to communicate that they were working on a plan —— to ensure that we do everything to prevent the spread of the disease.To address the spread, that they were working on guidelines, that they were aware of problems with testing for this virus that have plagued this administration for weeks.To mitigate its expansion and to provide necessary treatment to Americans that have been impacted.And after two weeks, Vice President Mike Pence was getting a lot of praise for his demeanor in these briefings.If I may, we’ll be back here every day. Get used to seeing us. We’re going to bring the experts in. We’re going to make sure and give you the best and most high quality, real time information from the best people in the world. So thank you all for being here.Thank you. You’re welcome back any time.And that became a point of concern for some of President Trump’s own advisers, who didn’t want to see Mike Pence get all of the attention.Huh. So the people around the president didn’t want the vice resident, rather than the president, to be the one seen as quarterbacking this major national crisis?That’s right. There was concern among the president’s top advisers that it would look as if Vice President Pence was basically doing the job the president should be doing — calming a nation, giving out accurate information, sounding as if he’s in charge. And that led to this idea that the president should give an Oval Office address. So on March 11, the same day the W.H.O. declared the coronavirus a global pandemic, President Trump sat in the Oval Office behind the Resolute Desk at 9 p.m., and the klieg lights came on and the teleprompter started rolling. And he gave an address to the nation.My fellow Americans, tonight I want to speak with you about our nation’s unprecedented response to the coronavirus outbreak that started in China and is now spreading throughout the world.For the first time, he acknowledged that this could impact older people.The highest risk is for elderly population with underlying health conditions. The elderly population must be very, very careful.He talked about a ban on most travel from Europe.To keep new cases from entering our shores, we will be suspending all travel from Europe to the United States for the next 30 days. The new rules will go into effect Friday at midnight.But the address, which was brief, as Oval Office addresses usually are, was seen as a disaster.Why?The President looked uncomfortable. He stumbled over the teleprompter, which he never does well with.I am confident that by counting and continuing to take these tough measures, we will —And it was riddled with errors, including about the travel ban.— and these prohibitions will not only apply to the tremendous amount of trade in cargo, but various other things as we get approval.He suggested that it would apply to cargo and trade. It didn’t, and those mistakes sent the stock markets plummeting.Right. And my assumption was that the President hoped the speech would do the exact opposite, which is it would give confidence to the stock market and send it back up.That’s right. The markets continued to tank over the next couple of days. And aides started realizing that there had to be a major course correction or the presidency could be threatened. And the President realized this too. So on March 17 —I would like to begin by announcing some important developments in our war against the Chinese virus.— we saw a pretty different tone from President Trump as he talked about this virus.We’ll be invoking the Defense Production Act just in case we need it. Last week, I signed an emergency declaration under the Stafford Act.He described it soberly. He suddenly seemed willing to answer questions without being combative.Do you consider America to be on a wartime footing in terms of fighting this virus?I do. I actually do. I’m looking at it that way, because you know —He described himself as a wartime president. He seemed to be taking this seriously in all of the ways that a nation usually looks for a leader to take such a crisis seriously.It’s a very tough situation, here. You have to do things. You have to close parts of an economy that six weeks ago were the best they’ve ever been. We had the best economy we’ve ever had. And then one day you have to close it down in order to defeat this enemy. But we’re doing it, and we’re doing it well. And I’d say the American people have been incredible.This was dramatically different from what we had heard just a few days earlier.Well, so, Maggie, how then do we get to today, where one week later, the situation with this pandemic has only gotten dramatically worse? The virus is exploding in places like New York. The number of infections and deaths are rising across the country. And yet, the president’s message has now kind of reverted back to where it was weeks and weeks ago. His language has changed. His overall comportment and the words he’s using — they’ve all kind of returned to a period where he was not taking this as seriously.There have been people in the President’s circle who, this entire time, even as the President changed his tone, still thought that some of the moves that the government was making were too aggressive. And those aides started, late last week, talking about the fact that they might want to revisit some of these guidelines and ease up on some of them for targeted groups after this initial 15-day period had ended, which is going to be March 30th. The president started getting the message in earnest on Sunday night that this is something that he needed to worry about. That there might not be an economy to return to once the country was fully back to normal. And so he tweeted on Sunday night that the cure couldn’t be worse than the disease. And that was the beginning of a massive shift of the federal government, which had moved toward aggressive measures to mitigate this virus and its spread, to suddenly suggesting that they could see the end nearing.We can’t lose a Boeing. And we can’t lose some of these companies. And companies — frankly, Bill — that were solid as, like, AAA companies. Because of what’s happened over the last couple of weeks, they go from AAA to being, like, they could use a hand.Tough time.We can’t — you’re right. We can’t lose those companies. If we lose those companies, were talking about hundreds of thousands of jobs, millions of jobs. The faster we go back, the better it’s going to be. We have a pent-up energy that’s going to be unbelievable.Is there a meaningful contingency of conservative leaders, thinkers, and politicians, economists even, people in business who feel this way, who feel like there’s been an overreaction to this virus in the form of shutting down the American economy?There are. Some of them are people who have been the president’s advisers on and off for a while, like Stephen Moore of FreedomWorks, who’s an economist and who advised the president at various points. He wrote an op-ed for The Wall Street Journal with Art Laffer, who the president gave the Medal of Freedom to not that long ago. And in that op-ed, they said, essentially, that the government can’t sustain this. That the economy can’t sustain this. And that there needs to be less draconian moves made to keep people safe but still allow the country to run.Mm-hmm.There is no public health expert in the government telling the president that these moves are too severe. There is no public health expert in the government telling the president that the curve is about to let up on the spread of the virus. Everything the president has done about this virus has been a reaction to something, and right now he is reacting to pressure to reopen portions of the economy, as the job losses are facing potential millions by April.You know, I don’t know whether the President would frame it this way, but I wonder if he’s forcing all of us to reckon with what is the ultimate moral dilemma of this pandemic, which is what economic and social cost we’re willing to pay to save some uncertain number of lives. And he seems to be saying, in effect, I’m willing to take the risk that a certain number of Americans will get sick and will die for the greater economic good and health of the United States.I mean, think of it. We average 36,000 people — death, death. I’m not talking about cases, I’m talking about death. 36,000 deaths a year. People die, 36 — from the flu. But we’ve never closed down the country for the flu. So you say to yourself, what is this all about? Now —How did you —It’s never been done.How did you process that?Not good. I wasn’t happy about it.Michael, I think that’s very much what he’s saying. And in fairness to him, Governor Cuomo has openly voiced the same moral dilemma that he is wrestling with. It’s just that Governor Cuomo came down on the other side of it, which was that there is no cost that can be put on human life.Yeah, my mother is not expendable. And your mother is not expendable. And our brothers and sisters they’re not expendable. And we’re not going to accept a premise that human life is disposable. And we’re not going to put a dollar figure on human life. The first order of business is save lives, period. Whatever it costs.New York has been, as we know, much harder hit than most of the rest of the country. Most of the rest of the country has not had to go through what New York is going through right now with surges in hospital stays and a number of sick people. The president says most of the country agrees with him, and maybe that’s why. But the president is taking a really large gamble, and going with his gut, that the greater good will be served for the rest of the country by trying to preserve the economic health of the country more quickly than his health experts would like him to.Maggie, thank you very much.Michael, thank you.On Tuesday night, Dr. Anthony Fauci, an infectious disease specialist and an influential member of the president’s coronavirus task force, was asked about the president’s plan to reopen the U.S. economy by Easter.Where are you now with this timeline of 19 days from now?So that’s really very flexible. We just had a conversation with the president in the Oval Office talking about, you know, you can look at a date, but you’ve got to be very flexible. On a literally day-by-day and week-by-week basis, you need to evaluate the feasibility of what you’re trying to do.With the president standing beside him, Fauci said it would be foolhardy to ease restrictions if major parts of the country were still in the throes of the pandemic.Obviously, no one is going to want to tone down things when you see what’s going on in a place like New York City. I mean, that’s just, you know, good public health practice and common sense.We’ll be right back.Here’s what else you need to know today.[SPEAKING HINDI]Nationwide lockdowns over the virus continued on Tuesday with India becoming the latest and largest country to require citizens to remain indoors, in India’s case, for the next 21 days.[SPEAKING HINDI]In a televised speech, Prime Minister Narendra Modi told Indians, quote, “If you can’t handle these 21 days, this country will go back 21 years.” And in the United States, Senate leaders said they were nearing a deal on a historic $2 trillion stimulus bill after days of objections from Democrats over who would monitor billions of dollars in loans to American businesses.We’ve been fighting very hard that any bailout fund — money to industries that have trouble — have real oversight and transparency. That’s vitally important.On Tuesday, Democrats said they had persuaded Republicans and the Trump administration to allow an independent inspector and a congressional oversight board to scrutinize the loans, and were almost ready to support the bill.I hope, I pray, that we can come together very quickly and pass in large numbers a bipartisan bill that will help the American people who so badly, badly, badly need our help.That’s it for “The Daily.” I’m Michael Barbaro. See you tomorrow.But the “wartime” strategy also presents risks to Mr. Trump. In his new posture, he is trying to rewrite recent history, erasing his comments from as recently as a week ago when he told Americans that they needed to “just relax” because “it all will pass.” It is also undercut by his resistance to calls for additional federal action from governors in hard-hit states.Mr. Trump’s temperament is also dissimilar to “wartime presidents” with whom he is seeking to compare himself. Over the course of his presidency, Mr. Trump has struggled to stick to any bipartisan message, or speak emotionally to the pain and fear of Americans during crisis points like natural disasters or mass shootings.“That’s why it’s so hard to be a wartime president,” said Michael Beschloss, the historian and author of “Presidents of War.” “Not only are you coming up with a strategy and tactics, but at the same time you have to let Americans know that you know how hard this is for them.”Mr. Trump, so far, has struggled to feel anyone’s pain, unlike past presidents, while continuing to play out the fights with the news media that enliven his base. Last week, he lashed out at a journalist who had prompted him to explain what his message was to the millions of Americans watching him from home, who felt scared.The president has also continued to credit his own administration’s response. But Mr. Beschloss added that “part of being a wartime president is being willing to give people bad news,” a job Mr. Trump has mostly left to others.At the same time, he has been timid of using wartime powers to fight what he has called an “invisible enemy.” Last week, for instance, he resisted invoking the Defense Production Act, a federal law that grants presidents extraordinary powers to force American industries to ensure the availability of critical equipment.Mr. Trump’s allies are aware that his re-election now hangs almost entirely on how he handles the crisis. And the question is whether he will be seen as President George W. Bush was in the immediate aftermath of the attacks of Sept. 11, 2001, when he was widely viewed as bringing the nation together, or if he will be compared to Mr. Bush amid the fallout from Hurricane Katrina, when he tried to minimize a crisis that eventually became too big for him to ignore, and during which Mr. Bush praised cabinet officials even as the federal government bungled the response.Aides said that how Mr. Trump ends up being perceived would also depend on Mr. Trump’s own disposition during the crisis. It is not clear to them whether he will be able to maintain his focus on the crisis for months, especially as the economic situation worsens. Over the weekend, some Trump advisers weren’t ready to accept the likelihood of jobless claims climbing into the millions by next month.The White House press secretary, Stephanie Grisham, defended Mr. Trump’s response as apolitical. “While it seems many in the media continue to use every opportunity to destroy this president, the fact remains that he has risen to fight this crisis by taking aggressive historic action to protect the health, wealth and well-being of the American people,” Ms. Grisham said in an email.Some Democrats, meanwhile, said the mistakes made at the beginning of the response had already colored how Mr. Trump would be remembered both in the history books and at the ballot box in November. “At the end of the day, this will be Katrina with the waters at a much higher level, and lasting a longer time,” said Geoff Garin, a Democratic pollster.But there is an emerging split in Democratic circles about whether to attack Mr. Trump’s response to the virus in real time, or whether the gravity of the moment calls for a pause in negative political advertising and attacks.Some of Mr. Trump’s highest-profile political adversaries leading states that have become epicenters of the virus have been striking conciliatory notes as they seek federal assistance. Mr. Cuomo said the president was “fully engaged” on the crisis. Gov. Gavin Newsom, Democrat of California, described a recent phone conversation with Mr. Trump as “a privilege.”Other antagonists have continued to criticize him. Mayor Bill de Blasio of New York tapped into one of Mr. Trump’s greatest fears when he referred to him on CNN as the “Herbert Hoover of his generation,” comparing him to a president who failed to recognize or take bold actions to stave off the stock market crash of 1929 and the subsequent Great Depression.The debate about whether to embrace or attack Mr. Trump in a national emergency played out most succinctly on Twitter between David Axelrod and David Plouffe, the two men who led Barack Obama’s presidential campaigns.Mr. Axelrod said that voters would have plenty of time to judge Mr. Trump’s handling of the coronavirus crisis, “but now doesn’t seem the moment for negative ads.” Mr. Plouffe responded that time was of the essence, and that Democrats couldn’t afford to “disarm” and let Mr. Trump create his own reality.Veterans of John Kerry’s 2004 campaign said Mr. Biden was in a stronger position against Mr. Trump than they were when they faced an election against Mr. Bush. Back then, Mr. Bush still basked in good will from his performance in the aftermath of the Sept. 11 attacks.Some Democratic Party officials said a comparison between Mr. Biden and Mr. Trump at a moment of crisis only helped Mr. Biden.“You can see the contrast between the steady, assured, informed and strong leadership that Vice President Biden has shown and the bungling, chaotic and dishonest start-stop approach that Mr. Trump has shown us since the beginning of this crisis,” said Gilberto Hinojosa, chairman of the Texas Democratic Party.Thomas Kaplan contributed reporting.Updated May 29, 2020Advertisement