https://www.nytimes.com/2020/05/25/nyregion/coronavirus-ny-live-updates.html
Live Coronavirus New York Updates - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
162
AdvertisementSupported byGovernor Cuomo, on the deck of the U.S.S. Intrepid, said the state would pay benefits to the families of workers who died while fighting the virus.[This briefing has ended. For the latest updates on the coronavirus outbreak in the New York area, read Tuesday’s live coverage.] 	Cases and deaths in New York State  See maps of the coronavirus outbreak in New York » Memorial Day weekend serves as a peek into what the city will look like in the coming months, a taste of summer that keeps New Yorkers looking forward.But this year, in the shadow of the coronavirus pandemic, people on Monday questioned how to gather during a crisis: Some watched socially distant processions instead of traditional parades, while others headed to the park or the beach, eager for the morning’s gray skies to clear.In Yonkers, just north of the city, military and emergency vehicles were part of a Motorcade Memorial Day Parade. An online flier encouraged onlookers to “wear a mask and practice social distancing.”On Long Island, Nassau County Executive Laura Curran hosted a car parade to the Veterans Memorial at Eisenhower Park in East Meadow. Residents were encouraged not to line the streets, but instead to watch a Facebook livestream and “salute” veterans remotely.In New York City, beaches were still closed to swimming, though most shorelines in the region were open. Still, the relatively cool weather and public safety measures — most beaches were operating at half-capacity, and many had limited their use to locals only — dampened the urge to pack the sand.But many people simply stayed home, unlike in years past, when they gathered on stoops and in public parks to barbecue and toast the arrival of the warmer season.Mayor Bill de Blasio said last week that he was considering opening beaches this summer, should the pandemic continue to ebb. The lifeguards’ union said its workers were preparing to return to their posts as early as June.Still, several members of the New York City Council urged the mayor to open the beaches for swimming.“Access to city beaches isn’t just a summer fun issue,” Corey Johnson, the Council speaker, said in a statement on Saturday. “It is an equity issue and a public health issue. All New Yorkers, not just those wealthy enough to travel out of the city, deserve access to  the  beach this summer.”The Council set forth several recommendations for a beach reopening, including: flags in the sand to indicate where beachgoers can sit while social distancing; walking lanes; limited entry; increased transportation options; and personal protective equipment and testing for lifeguards.New York’s state and local governments will provide death benefits to the families of essential workers who died while fighting the coronavirus pandemic, Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo said on Monday.“We want to make sure that we remember them, and we thank our heroes of today, and they’re all around us,” Mr. Cuomo said at his daily news briefing.As people paused on Memorial Day to remember military personnel who died while serving the country, Mr. Cuomo linked the fallen service members to New York’s front-line workers, whom he called today’s “heroes.”The public employees whose families would receive death benefits included health workers, police officers, firefighters, transit workers and emergency medical workers, the governor said. The benefits would be paid out of state and local pension funds.transcriptDuring these times, there are so many Americans who have really risen to the challenge, done more than anyone could ask, more than anyone could expect. We want to make sure that we remember them and we thank our heroes of today. I know that I feel a grave responsibility to our frontline workers, our essential workers who understood the dangers of this Covid virus, but went to work anyway because we needed them to. We needed the nurses and the doctors to perform phenomenal service in the hospitals. We needed the police, the fire department, the E.M.S. to show up. We needed the frontline workers in grocery stores to show up, so others could stay home and be safe. And in many ways that is a microcosm of what we’re here talking about today on Memorial Day. But, as John F. Kennedy said, “Remember with your actions.” And today we’re saying we honor that service and we’re going to make sure that every government in the state of New York provides death benefits to those public heroes who died from Covid-19 during this emergency. I also believe the federal government should be doing the same: honoring the frontline workers, showing Americans that we appreciate what you did. That you showed up when it was hard. That you worked when it was hard. You appeared for duty when it was, it was troubling to do so. And I’m sure many people were afraid to show up, but they showed up anyway.Mr. Cuomo noted that even as he shut down the state, citing the severity of the outbreak, workers across New York had been required to put themselves in danger to help fight the virus.“They showed up because I asked them to show up,” he said.Mr. Cuomo also called on the federal government to provide funds to give hazard pay to workers who were crucial to keeping states and municipalities operating during the outbreak.Last week, Mr. de Blasio urged the state to approve line-of-duty death benefits for the families of municipal employees who died of the virus. Some lawmakers in nearby New Jersey are also urging their state to consider taking similar action.The Metropolitan Transportation Authority, which runs New York City’s subway and buses, has also said it would give death benefits to the families of coronavirus victims.Mr. Cuomo’s announcement came as New York reported 96 new deaths related to the virus, only the second time that the state’s death toll had fallen below 100 since late March.The governor, who held his news briefing on the deck of the U.S.S. Intrepid, an aircraft carrier turned museum anchored at the piers along the Hudson River, specifically mentioned veterans who died of the virus.Before the briefing began, the governor and his daughter Michaela Kennedy-Cuomo participated in a Memorial Day ceremony.Green-Wood Cemetery, the 182-year-old resting grounds of New Yorkers famous and humble, has seen a sharp increase in visitors during the pandemic, its sprawling acres of wide roads and paths a perfect setting for social distancing.A recent email from the cemetery threatening closure because of rule breakers — dog walkers, joggers, children climbing on stones — made the rounds with yikes-Dad-is-angry urgency, and the threat has not been repeated.The Brooklyn cemetery’s Hill of Graves holds some of the oldest stones, their inscriptions worn down by the years. Rounding one side of the hill leads to the Soldiers’ Lot, holding the remains of some of the cemetery’s 6,000 Civil War dead, each marked with a modest white stone bearing names like Capt. Marcus Monck, Sgt. Charles P. Abbins, Pvt. David Crawford.The largest monument in the lot is a statue marked, “Our Drummer Boy,” a zinc figure in uniform carrying a marching drum. It is a monument to Clarence D. MacKenzie, a 12-year-old boy who had traveled to join Brooklyn’s 13th Regiment at Annapolis. While there, in his tent, he was struck and killed by a fellow officer’s bullet during a drill.The cemetery was more crowded Monday, shortly after noon, than on many recent weekdays, but still felt wide open, its visitors spread out. To mark Memorial Day, all the stones at Soldier’s Lot were marked with a small American flag. The flags are normally placed by Boy Scouts and Girl Scouts, but this holiday weekend they were offered to visitors at the entrances, who found the graves themselves.Updated May 28, 2020States are reopening bit by bit. This means that more public spaces are available for use and more and more businesses are being allowed to open again. The federal government is largely leaving the decision up to states, and some state leaders are leaving the decision up to local authorities. Even if you aren’t being told to stay at home, it’s still a good idea to limit trips outside and your interaction with other people.Touching contaminated objects and then infecting ourselves with the germs is not typically how the virus spreads. But it can happen. A number of studies of flu, rhinovirus, coronavirus and other microbes have shown that respiratory illnesses, including the new coronavirus, can spread by touching contaminated surfaces, particularly in places like day care centers, offices and hospitals. But a long chain of events has to happen for the disease to spread that way. The best way to protect yourself from coronavirus — whether it’s surface transmission or close human contact — is still social distancing, washing your hands, not touching your face and wearing masks.Common symptoms include fever, a dry cough, fatigue and difficulty breathing or shortness of breath. Some of these symptoms overlap with those of the flu, making detection difficult, but runny noses and stuffy sinuses are less common. The C.D.C. has also added chills, muscle pain, sore throat, headache and a new loss of the sense of taste or smell as symptoms to look out for. Most people fall ill five to seven days after exposure, but symptoms may appear in as few as two days or as many as 14 days.If air travel is unavoidable, there are some steps you can take to protect yourself. Most important: Wash your hands often, and stop touching your face. If possible, choose a window seat. A study from Emory University found that during flu season, the safest place to sit on a plane is by a window, as people sitting in window seats had less contact with potentially sick people. Disinfect hard surfaces. When you get to your seat and your hands are clean, use disinfecting wipes to clean the hard surfaces at your seat like the head and arm rest, the seatbelt buckle, the remote, screen, seat back pocket and the tray table. If the seat is hard and nonporous or leather or pleather, you can wipe that down, too. (Using wipes on upholstered seats could lead to a wet seat and spreading of germs rather than killing them.)More than 40 million people — the equivalent of 1 in 4 U.S. workers — have filed for unemployment benefits since the pandemic took hold. One in five who were working in February reported losing a job or being furloughed in March or the beginning of April, data from a Federal Reserve survey released on May 14 showed, and that pain was highly concentrated among low earners. Fully 39 percent of former workers living in a household earning $40,000 or less lost work, compared with 13 percent in those making more than $100,000, a Fed official said.There is an uptick in people reporting symptoms of chilblains, which are painful red or purple lesions that typically appear in the winter on fingers or toes. The lesions are emerging as yet another symptom of infection with the new coronavirus. Chilblains are caused by inflammation in small blood vessels in reaction to cold or damp conditions, but they are usually common in the coldest winter months. Federal health officials do not include toe lesions in the list of coronavirus symptoms, but some dermatologists are pushing for a change, saying so-called Covid toe should be sufficient grounds for testing.Yes, but make sure you keep six feet of distance between you and people who don’t live in your home. Even if you just hang out in a park, rather than go for a jog or a walk, getting some fresh air, and hopefully sunshine, is a good idea.Taking one’s temperature to look for signs of fever is not as easy as it sounds, as “normal” temperature numbers can vary, but generally, keep an eye out for a temperature of 100.5 degrees Fahrenheit or higher. If you don’t have a thermometer (they can be pricey these days), there are other ways to figure out if you have a fever, or are at risk of Covid-19 complications.The C.D.C. has recommended that all Americans wear cloth masks if they go out in public. This is a shift in federal guidance reflecting new concerns that the coronavirus is being spread by infected people who have no symptoms. Until now, the C.D.C., like the W.H.O., has advised that ordinary people don’t need to wear masks unless they are sick and coughing. Part of the reason was to preserve medical-grade masks for health care workers who desperately need them at a time when they are in continuously short supply. Masks don’t replace hand washing and social distancing.If you’ve been exposed to the coronavirus or think you have, and have a fever or symptoms like a cough or difficulty breathing, call a doctor. They should give you advice on whether you should be tested, how to get tested, and how to seek medical treatment without potentially infecting or exposing others.If you’re sick and you think you’ve been exposed to the new coronavirus, the C.D.C. recommends that you call your healthcare provider and explain your symptoms and fears. They will decide if you need to be tested. Keep in mind that there’s a chance — because of a lack of testing kits or because you’re asymptomatic, for instance — you won’t be able to get tested.Charity Navigator, which evaluates charities using a numbers-based system, has a running list of nonprofits working in communities affected by the outbreak. You can give blood through the American Red Cross, and World Central Kitchen has stepped in to distribute meals in major cities.A closer look showed that someone left something different at Clarence’s marker. At the base of the marble stone bearing his name and young age lay a pair of drumsticks.Humans are not the only ones who miss dining out.As restaurants and other businesses have closed during the coronavirus pandemic, rats may become more aggressive as they hunt for new sources of food, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention warned.Environmental health and rodent control programs may see an increase in service requests related to “unusual or aggressive” rodent behavior, the agency said on its website on Thursday.“The rats are not becoming aggressive toward people, but toward each other,” Bobby Corrigan, an urban rodentologist who has both a master’s degree and Ph.D. in rodent pest management, said on Sunday. “They’re simply turning on each other.”Dr. Corrigan said there are certain colonies of rats in New York that have depended on restaurants’ nightly trash for hundreds of generations, coming out of the sewers and alleys to ravage the bags left on the streets. With the shutdown, all of that went away, leaving rats hungry and desperate.Other unusual rodent behavior may be on the rise, too. Researchers are studying if disruptions in food supply are causing rats to more frequently set up shop in car engines.The outlook for the patient assigned to Capt. Eric Dungan on May 1 was bleak: George Crouch, 96, seemed to have given up on life.His wife had died of Covid-19, and Mr. Crouch was also battling the illness in the hospital. Since his wife’s death in late April, he was refusing medical care and would not eat.Captain Dungan, a trained social worker in the U.S. Army Reserves, had been deployed from Indiana to New York City to help hospitals during the coronavirus crisis. Many of his patients had already died of the illness, and given Mr. Crouch’s age, condition and temperament, Captain Dungan braced for the worst.A nurse stopped him on his way to visit Mr. Crouch for the first time. Did Captain Dungan know, the nurse asked, that Mr. Crouch was a veteran of World War II?“I always see World War II vets as national treasures,” Captain Dungan said. “He did not disappoint.”The soldiers’ disparate paths had collided at that hospital bedside.Mr. Crouch was decades out of the Army; Captain Dungan, 46, had only just signed up for the reserves, driven to enlist after the death of his own father, a veteran.Bonded by their time in the service, the two men connected. Through their friendship, Mr. Crouch found something to live for, his family believes.“Captain Eric Dungan had immense impact on him. And on us, we really love him,” said Kai Adwoa-Thomas, Mr. Crouch’s daughter.As The New York Times follows the spread of the coronavirus across New York, New Jersey and Connecticut, we need your help. We want to talk to doctors, nurses, lab technicians, respiratory therapists, emergency services workers, nursing home managers — anyone who can share what’s happening in the region’s hospitals and other health care centers.A reporter or editor may contact you. Your information will not be published without your consent.Sandra E. Garcia, Michael Gold, Joseph Goldstein, Jesse McKinley, Mariel Padilla, Dana Rubinstein, Ali Watkins and Michael Wilson contributed reporting.Advertisement