https://www.nytimes.com/2005/04/15/nyregion/exofficer-convicted-in-choking-death-is-to-leave-prison.html
Ex-Officer Convicted in Choking Death Is to Leave Prison - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
104
AdvertisementSupported byBy Alan FeuerIt would seem that two criminal trials, a seven-and-a-half-year prison term and endless days of consternation on both sides have not changed attitudes much in the case of Francis X. Livoti.Mr. Livoti, now in his mid-40's, is the former police officer who was sent away in 1998 for using a deadly chokehold on Anthony Baez in the Bronx nearly 11 years ago. According to his lawyer, he still believes that Mr. Baez died of an acute asthma attack.Iris Baez is Mr. Baez's mother. She still believes that Mr. Livoti murdered her son.The incident might seem like history, having taken place on Dec. 22, 1994, on a quiet side street in the University Heights section of the Bronx. History, however, has a funny way of looping around on itself. The loop will take another turn this Sunday when Mr. Livoti is to step from the Federal Correctional Institution in Butner, N.C., as a free man.The fatal encounter, one of the city's mostly widely publicized cases of police brutality, began around 1 a.m. on Cameron Place as Mr. Baez, then 29 and back from Florida for the holidays, was playing football outside his mother's house with three of his brothers and their friends.A stray toss landed on a nearby police car. Then another. Officer Livoti got out of the car and placed one of Mr. Baez's brothers under arrest for disturbing the peace.Anthony Baez, a security guard, protested and eventually resisted his own arrest by crossing his arms on his chest as he leaned against a parked car. Mr. Livoti put Mr. Baez in a chokehold. Shortly afterward, Mr. Baez died.Mr. Livoti was acquitted in the first trial stemming from the case, a state trial in 1996 in which he was charged with criminally negligent homicide. After the acquittal, he was charged by federal prosecutors with depriving Mr. Baez of his civil rights. In that trial, he was convicted and sentenced to the seven and a half years behind bars.Mr. Livoti's lawyer, Stuart London, was traveling and could not be reached for comment, but several months ago he said that his client wanted only to live a quiet life among his friends and family, whom he sorely missed.Mr. London also said that Mr. Livoti still believed that Mr. Baez died of a medical condition. This is a position that Mrs. Baez can neither stomach nor understand."He chose to murder my son," she said in a telephone interview yesterday, her voice quavering. "It's already a slap in the face that he was convicted for violating Anthony's rights, not murder. Now he's getting out. I call it a slap."Mrs. Baez, 60, has spent the years since her son's death railing against police brutality. She founded the Anthony Baez Foundation, a civil rights organization that helps victims of police abuse find lawyers and navigate the court system. She has appeared in documentary films about his case. She even ran for City Council, unsuccessfully.She still lives on Cameron Place, in the same house, which now has a portrait of Anthony painted on the side.Mrs. Baez plans to join a protest on Monday at City Hall, held in her words to "let the community know that there's a murderer out on the street."She still breathes hard when she talks about that night and Mr. Livoti."I take it a day at a time," she said. "My husband was right there begging him to let him go. Right now I'm just dealing with the problem."Advertisement