https://www.nytimes.com/2020/03/25/upshot/coronavirus-health-insurance-faq.html
How to Get Health Insurance if Worried About Coronavirus or Unemployment - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
196
AdvertisementSupported byThere are more options for getting coverage than in past economic crises.By Margot Sanger-Katz and Reed AbelsonMost working-age Americans get their health insurance through their employer. Which means a job loss during the coronavirus pandemic could mean losing your health insurance.In past economic crises, options for buying affordable health insurance were limited. But provisions in the Affordable Care Act, along with actions taken recently by Congress and some states, mean more opportunities for getting coverage. Here’s a guide to the options, which differ depending on your circumstances.You can keep your coverage for as long as 18 months under the federal law known as the Consolidated Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act (COBRA). But only if you’re willing to pay as much as the total amount of your premium (monthly fee) — both what you normally pay and what your employer had contributed toward your premium.Though particular circumstances vary, COBRA coverage tends to be more expensive than coverage in the Obamacare marketplaces. It may be a particularly desirable option for anyone in the middle of treatment for an acute or chronic condition because it will allow you to keep seeing the same doctors. Your employer may also be willing to subsidize some of the monthly cost for a period.In 36 states (plus the District of Columbia), you most likely qualify for the federal-state health insurance program known as Medicaid. Because of Obamacare, most states now allow all residents to qualify for Medicaid if their household’s monthly income is below a certain threshold — around $1,400 for a single person or $2,950 monthly for a family of four. That calculation should include any normal unemployment benefits you are receiving, but not the additional $600 a week being paid temporarily under new relief legislation, and not any special stimulus payments. There’s a list of states that have expanded their programs in this way here.For somewhat complicated reasons, the best way to apply for Medicaid if you’re in this situation is to go directly to your state Medicaid agency, not the Healthcare.gov site.Medicaid coverage typically has no or very low premiums, and has very low co-payments when you go to the doctor or fill a prescription. But it tends to cover fewer doctors than work-based insurance coverage does.If you live in a state that has not expanded its Medicaid program, qualifying for coverage may be harder. You may need to be a parent or meet other qualifications. Your child may qualify for coverage even if you don’t.If your monthly income is low enough to qualify for Medicaid but you expect your annual income to be higher than the above income thresholds, you could also choose to buy an Obamacare marketplace plan, probably with substantial subsidies. See below.If you have recently lost your job-based coverage, you can qualify for a special enrollment period to buy insurance on the Affordable Care Act marketplaces. Coverage there is subsidized on a sliding scale according to income, and there are several choices of plan in most markets. To look at your options, Healthcare.gov is a good first stop. Some states list insurance options on their websites, but the federal site will point you in the right direction.Depending on which state you live in, you may need to provide documents showing that you recently lost your job. You may also need to provide proof that your income is now lower than it was when you filed your last tax return, if it has fallen. In calculating your income for this purpose, you should include any unemployment benefits you are receiving, including the additional $600 a week that will be paid temporarily under the new economic relief legislation. You do not need to include any stimulus payment you get from the government.The subsidies people get for insurance in the Obamacare marketplace are calculated at the beginning of the year, based on estimated income for that year. But if you bought insurance and your income changes, you can go back to the marketplace and adjust. You may need to provide documents proving the income change, like a termination letter or a recent paycheck.Updated May 28, 2020States are reopening bit by bit. This means that more public spaces are available for use and more and more businesses are being allowed to open again. The federal government is largely leaving the decision up to states, and some state leaders are leaving the decision up to local authorities. Even if you aren’t being told to stay at home, it’s still a good idea to limit trips outside and your interaction with other people.Touching contaminated objects and then infecting ourselves with the germs is not typically how the virus spreads. But it can happen. A number of studies of flu, rhinovirus, coronavirus and other microbes have shown that respiratory illnesses, including the new coronavirus, can spread by touching contaminated surfaces, particularly in places like day care centers, offices and hospitals. But a long chain of events has to happen for the disease to spread that way. The best way to protect yourself from coronavirus — whether it’s surface transmission or close human contact — is still social distancing, washing your hands, not touching your face and wearing masks.Common symptoms include fever, a dry cough, fatigue and difficulty breathing or shortness of breath. Some of these symptoms overlap with those of the flu, making detection difficult, but runny noses and stuffy sinuses are less common. The C.D.C. has also added chills, muscle pain, sore throat, headache and a new loss of the sense of taste or smell as symptoms to look out for. Most people fall ill five to seven days after exposure, but symptoms may appear in as few as two days or as many as 14 days.If air travel is unavoidable, there are some steps you can take to protect yourself. Most important: Wash your hands often, and stop touching your face. If possible, choose a window seat. A study from Emory University found that during flu season, the safest place to sit on a plane is by a window, as people sitting in window seats had less contact with potentially sick people. Disinfect hard surfaces. When you get to your seat and your hands are clean, use disinfecting wipes to clean the hard surfaces at your seat like the head and arm rest, the seatbelt buckle, the remote, screen, seat back pocket and the tray table. If the seat is hard and nonporous or leather or pleather, you can wipe that down, too. (Using wipes on upholstered seats could lead to a wet seat and spreading of germs rather than killing them.)More than 40 million people — the equivalent of 1 in 4 U.S. workers — have filed for unemployment benefits since the pandemic took hold. One in five who were working in February reported losing a job or being furloughed in March or the beginning of April, data from a Federal Reserve survey released on May 14 showed, and that pain was highly concentrated among low earners. Fully 39 percent of former workers living in a household earning $40,000 or less lost work, compared with 13 percent in those making more than $100,000, a Fed official said.There is an uptick in people reporting symptoms of chilblains, which are painful red or purple lesions that typically appear in the winter on fingers or toes. The lesions are emerging as yet another symptom of infection with the new coronavirus. Chilblains are caused by inflammation in small blood vessels in reaction to cold or damp conditions, but they are usually common in the coldest winter months. Federal health officials do not include toe lesions in the list of coronavirus symptoms, but some dermatologists are pushing for a change, saying so-called Covid toe should be sufficient grounds for testing.Yes, but make sure you keep six feet of distance between you and people who don’t live in your home. Even if you just hang out in a park, rather than go for a jog or a walk, getting some fresh air, and hopefully sunshine, is a good idea.Taking one’s temperature to look for signs of fever is not as easy as it sounds, as “normal” temperature numbers can vary, but generally, keep an eye out for a temperature of 100.5 degrees Fahrenheit or higher. If you don’t have a thermometer (they can be pricey these days), there are other ways to figure out if you have a fever, or are at risk of Covid-19 complications.The C.D.C. has recommended that all Americans wear cloth masks if they go out in public. This is a shift in federal guidance reflecting new concerns that the coronavirus is being spread by infected people who have no symptoms. Until now, the C.D.C., like the W.H.O., has advised that ordinary people don’t need to wear masks unless they are sick and coughing. Part of the reason was to preserve medical-grade masks for health care workers who desperately need them at a time when they are in continuously short supply. Masks don’t replace hand washing and social distancing.If you’ve been exposed to the coronavirus or think you have, and have a fever or symptoms like a cough or difficulty breathing, call a doctor. They should give you advice on whether you should be tested, how to get tested, and how to seek medical treatment without potentially infecting or exposing others.If you’re sick and you think you’ve been exposed to the new coronavirus, the C.D.C. recommends that you call your healthcare provider and explain your symptoms and fears. They will decide if you need to be tested. Keep in mind that there’s a chance — because of a lack of testing kits or because you’re asymptomatic, for instance — you won’t be able to get tested.Charity Navigator, which evaluates charities using a numbers-based system, has a running list of nonprofits working in communities affected by the outbreak. You can give blood through the American Red Cross, and World Central Kitchen has stepped in to distribute meals in major cities.At the end of the year, your subsidies will be settled once you file your taxes. If you miscalculated and received too much in subsidies, you will have to repay the difference then.Normally, you can sign up for insurance only once a year unless something major in your life changes, like a job loss, a divorce or a move to a new insurance market. But because of the coronavirus pandemic, some employers and states are loosening those rules. So far, 11 states and the District of Columbia are allowing uninsured residents to sign up for Obamacare plans now, regardless of why they are uninsured. The states are California, Colorado, Connecticut, Maryland, Massachusetts, Minnesota, Nevada, New York, Rhode Island, Vermont and Washington, and you can go to their insurance marketplace websites.Some employers are doing the same, so it may be worth checking with your company’s human resources department if you’re still employed and eligible for work-based coverage.Short-term, limited-duration health plans are less likely to cover testing and treatment for coronavirus than more comprehensive plans offered through Medicaid, the Obamacare marketplaces or most workplaces. If you bought a plan like this and want to switch to a broader one, your options are similar to those for people with no insurance. If you are in a state with a special enrollment period, you can sign up for Obamacare insurance now. If your employer offers a special enrollment period, you may also be able to enroll in that type of coverage.But if you’re in a state that hasn’t changed its normal policy, you will be eligible to enroll in new coverage only if you have a qualifying life event like a divorce or if your income is low enough that you qualify for Medicaid.Advertisement