https://www.nytimes.com/2020/03/17/opinion/coronavirus-food-delivery-workers.html
Opinion | I Deliver Your Food. Don’t I Deserve Basic Protections? - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
228
AdvertisementSupported byLike emergency income support, for starters.By Mariah MitchellMs. Mitchell works for multiple driving and food delivery gig apps.SEATTLE — I’m a single mother, and I’ve worked hard to stay in this city, where I grew up. I graduated from the University of Washington, but no employer would give me the flexibility I needed to care for my three girls. That’s why I started delivering food for Caviar five years ago. Now I do the same for Postmates, DoorDash, Uber Eats and Instacart. I also drive for Lyft.Gig work like this has kept me alive, but it’s a lot of hours for pay of next to nothing. I wake up at 4:30 in the morning for the breakfast orders, then switch to Lyft to drive people to work. Next, I drop my children off at school and get back online for the lunch rush. In the afternoon, I take a break to pick up the children and try to find time to feed them without missing the dinner rush from 5 to 9. Some days, I have to work 16 hours to make ends meet.That was before the coronavirus.Since then, work has slowed considerably. Driving for Lyft for five hours on Friday, I picked up only three riders. Normally, I would have gotten 15. People aren’t going to work. There aren’t airport pickups; no one is flying. Food delivery has been OK, but restaurants are closing. If they don’t keep online orders going, there’s no work for me.On Postmates, the orders are coming in fast, but the company isn’t paying more. Instead, it’s recruiting new workers. Last week, it offered us bonuses for helping it so — and with so many people out of work, this will be easy.On top of that, the state shut down schools, so my children are at home. Luckily, I don’t have to worry about child care, like many other workers. My youngest daughter can stay home with her sister, who’s 17. Or, I can take her with me while I make deliveries. But my children got free breakfast and lunch at school, and now we have to go there to pick up a food sack during lunchtime — right when I should be making deliveries.In Seattle, leaders have taken some helpful steps. They’ve stopped electricity and water shut-offs and announced a moratorium on evictions for tenants who can’t make rent. That’s good, because the weather has gotten really cold. We don’t need to add to our homeless population — and gig workers who are losing incomes would be among the first to lose their home.While the governor expanded eligibility for paid leave and unemployment insurance for regular employees, this should extend to gig workers who are classified as independent contractors. We need emergency income support too. I can’t get unemployment benefits if I lose work because of the coronavirus. There are so many unknowns for us, and I need to know I’ll still have an income if everything shuts down, or if someone in my family gets sick.But that can’t happen. I can’t self-quarantine because not working is not an option. If I don’t make enough money, I can’t feed my children for the next six weeks. I’m not stopping, fever or no fever. And that’s what most other gig workers would do too, because none of us makes enough money to save up for an emergency like this.The gig companies should get us through this crisis. We deserve emergency income support so we can stay afloat — and gig workers need minimum pay standards for the long run, so we have something saved before the next crisis comes. That’s why I’ve been working with the Pay Up campaign to pass laws that would protect tips, set a pay floor to ensure we make at least $15 an hour plus the expenses of driving and allow workers to know what they’re getting paid for a job and why.Gig companies should provide pay for workers even when we can’t work. If they want to prevent us from spreading the virus, they need to pay us a basic income to stay home. They should also provide supplies like sanitizer to prevent exposure while mandating no-contact deliveries to keep workers safe. It would also be safer to go into a restaurant and not have any contact with the staff.We needed these protections before the crisis hit, and we need them now more than ever. In a way, gig workers are acting as first responders — making sure people can go to the doctor, and get food and supplies if they need to stay home. When you support gig workers, you’re doing the same for our community.Mariah Mitchell is a member of the Pay Up campaign with the organization Working Washington.The Times is committed to publishing a diversity of letters to the editor. We’d like to hear what you think about this or any of our articles. Here are some tips. And here’s our email: letters@nytimes.com.Follow The New York Times Opinion section on Facebook, Twitter (@NYTopinion) and Instagram.Advertisement