https://www.nytimes.com/2020/02/18/well/move/in-6-minutes-you-can-be-done-with-your-workout.html
In 6 Minutes, You Can Be Done With Your Workout - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
327
AdvertisementSupported byOur three short workout videos will get your heart pumping and give you a full-body workout without a trip to the gym.By Tara Parker-PopetranscriptThis is Asmeret. She’s going to do today’s workout with you. There are four simple exercises. Jumping jacks, standing lunges, kneeling push-ups and plank. You’ll repeat them twice, giving you a total body workout. Each exercise is 30 seconds long. Do them at your own pace. You’ll rest for 15 seconds after each exercise. Give yourself enough space to move around. And grab some water, a towel, or a mat, if you like. Are you ready? Your six-minute workout starts in three, two, one. Let’s go. Jumping jacks are a great cardio exercise. As you jump, make sure you stay on your toes, with your knees slightly bent. Try to keep up with Asmeret, or go at your own pace. You have 10 seconds to go. Three, two, one. You have 15 seconds before your next exercise. Great job. Now rest, stretch or grab some water. Rested? Let’s go. Standing lunges work the lower body. Keep your back straight as you bend both knees and press down. Now switch legs. If you’re off balance, slow down to keep your body stable. Three, two, one. Kneeling push-ups tone your upper body. Keep your hands just wider than shoulder-width apart and your body straight from head to knees. Push-ups can be hard. Bending slightly at the hips, like Asmeret is doing, can make the exercise a bit easier. Ten seconds to go. Three, two, one. Plank pose strengthens your core. Lower onto your forearms and keep your body straight from head to heel. Don’t forget to breathe. If a regular plank is too hard, try a kneeling plank, which puts less stress on your back. Ten seconds to go. Three, two, one. You’re halfway there. Grab some water. We’re going to repeat each of these exercises one more time. Ready? Three, two, one. Jumping jacks keep your heart rate up. As you jump, spread your legs about shoulder-width apart. Asmeret has picked up the pace. Try to push yourself, too. Ten seconds to go. Three, two, one. Standing lunges work your glutes, quads and calves. Rest your hands on your knees to steady yourself. Now switch legs. Pay attention to your body. If you feel pain in your knees, don’t go as low. Three, two, one. Kneeling push-ups are the hardest part of today’s workout. Try to keep your body straight from your head to your knees. But if you need to, you can bend at your hips, like Asmeret. If you’re struggling, you can try a standing push-up against the wall to make it easier. Ten seconds to go. Three, two, one. A plank should engage your abs, as well as your back, quads and glutes. To keep your neck and spine straight, look at a spot on the floor about a foot from your hands. Plank time is a good moment for mindfulness. Keep breathing and remind yourself why you’re making this change. Ten seconds to go. Three, two, one. Congratulations. You just completed your six-minute workout. Grab some water. In a few seconds, we’re going to cool down with two easy yoga stretches. This is child’s pose. Bow forward with your arms outstretched and rest your forehead on the floor. Allow all the tension in your shoulders, neck and arms to drift away. Stay here for 10 deep, slow breaths. Now let’s finish in Shavasana. Empty your mind and relax into the floor. Take a moment to be aware of your body. Feel gratitude for your health and your strength. Stay here as long as you like.Do you have six minutes to spare? Then you can do a workout.I know that six minutes of exercise doesn’t seem like much. You might wonder: Is it even worth my time? The answer is yes! We created this workout with Chris Jordan, Director of Exercise Physiology at Johnson & Johnson Human Performance Institute and creator of the widely-known 7 Minute Workout. His research shows that even very small amounts of exercise, when carried out with intensity, can reap big fitness rewards. By committing to a super short workout today, you are taking the first small step to building a fitness routine. Remember, new habits start with small changes, not big moves. Commit to just six minutes of exercise three times a week and you are on your way to a lifelong fitness habit.transcriptThis is Malia. She’s going to do today’s workout with you. There are four simple exercises: Stand and box, side squats, kneeling push-ups and bird dog. You’ll repeat them twice, giving you a total body workout. Each exercise is 30 seconds long. Do them at your own pace. You’ll rest for 15 seconds after each exercise. Give yourself enough space to move around, and grab some water, a towel or a mat, if you like. Are you ready? Your six-minute workout starts in three, two, one. Let’s go. Stand and box is a cardio exercise. Punch like a boxer, alternating your arms forward and back. Malia is starting slowly, but you can always go faster to elevate your heart rate. Ten seconds to go. Three, two, one. You have 15 seconds before your next exercise. Great job. Now rest, stretch or grab some water. Rested? Let’s go. Side squats work your lower body. Take a step and bend your knees on alternating sides. Don’t let your knees go past your toes. Keep up the pace and use your arms to help you stay balanced. Ten seconds to go. Three, two, one. Kneeling push-ups exercise your upper body. Hands should be just wider than shoulder-width apart. Notice how Malia keeps her body straight from head to knees. Breathe out as you push back up. Don’t worry if you can’t go very fast. Only 10 seconds to go. Three, two, one. Bird dog engages your core. On your hands and knees, raise your arm and your opposite leg until they’re parallel to the floor. Switch from side to side. Keep your abs tight. It’s O.K. to slow down if you feel unsteady. Ten seconds to go. Three, two, one. You’re halfway there. Now we’re going to repeat each of these exercises one more time. Ready? Three, two, one. Back to Stand and box to keep your heart rate up. Keep your knees slightly bent and core engaged. If this feels too easy, pick up the pace and punch more rapidly. Ten seconds to go. Three, two, one. Side squats will help you tone your lower body. Keep your spine straight, hips back and heels on the floor. Breathe in as you squat. Use the heel on your outer leg to push yourself up. Ten seconds to go. Three, two, one. Kneeling push-ups place less body weight on your arms than regular push-ups. Slowly bend your elbows and lower your chest to the floor, keeping your back straight. This might be harder than the first time around. Raising your legs can ease the stress on your knees. Ten seconds to go. Three, two, one. Back to bird dog, which strengthens your abs and back muscles at the same time. Focus on engaging your core so you don’t wobble and your rib cage doesn’t sag. Move slowly to stay balanced. Ten seconds to go. Three, two, one. Congratulations. You just completed your six-minute workout. Grab some water. In a few seconds, we’re going to cool down with two easy yoga stretches. This is a modified happy baby pose. Pull your knees to your chest and rock side to side, holding your shins. Breathe in and out for 10 deep, slow breaths. Now, let’s finish in Shavasana. Empty your mind and relax into the floor. Take a moment to acknowledge all the hard work you’ve done today. Be proud of yourself. Stay here as long as you like.To help you, we’ve created three 6-minute workouts. Each workout will exercise four main muscle groups: Cardio, Lower Body, Upper Body and Abs (often called your Core). You’ll do each exercise for just 30 seconds followed by 15 seconds of rest and then repeat once. That means each muscle group gets a full 2.5 minutes of rest before working again. Push yourself and keep a brisk pace so that you’re working intensely, but don’t push so hard that you lose your form. It’s O.K. to feel discomfort, but you shouldn’t feel pain. And here’s something to look forward to: Every 6-Minute Workout will end with two relaxing yoga poses to help you refresh.A 28-day plan to nourish your body, mind and spirit, one daily challenge at a time.You can also try a 6-Minute Workout on your smart speaker using our 6-Minute Workout skill on Alexa. Find out how to get started here.transcriptThis is Jillian. She’s going to do today’s workout with you. There are four simple exercises — march in place, squats, push-ups with twist and bicycle crunches. You’ll repeat them twice, giving you a total body workout. Each exercise is 30 seconds long. Do them at your own pace. You’ll rest for 15 seconds after each exercise. Give yourself enough space to move around. And grab some water, a towel or a mat, if you like. Are you ready? Your six-minute workout starts in three, two, one. Let’s go. March in place is a cardio exercise. Lift your knee as you swing the opposite elbow forward. Keep it up as you alternate sides. Keep pace with Jillian, or go faster if you can. Ten seconds to go — three, two, one. You have 15 seconds before your next exercise. Great job. Now rest, stretch or grab some water. Rested? Let’s go. Squats work the lower body. As you squat, make sure your knees are behind your toes when you look down. Keep your heels on the floor. Breathe in as you squat, and exhale as you come up. Ten seconds to go — three, two, one. Push-ups with twist combines a kneeling push-up with an upper body rotation and an arm stretch. Try to keep your body straight from head to knees. If you’re struggling, you can bend from your hips, like Jillian, to make it a bit easier. If you find the twist too difficult, you can skip it and just do regular push-ups. Ten seconds to go — three, two, one. Bicycle crunches work your abdominal muscles. Lie down on the floor with your knees bent. Now crunch your stomach and pedal your legs. Focus on tightening your core, and don’t forget to breathe. Ten seconds to go — three, two, one. You’re halfway there. Now we’re going to repeat each of these exercises one more time. Ready? Three, two, one. March in place boosts your heart rate without placing strain on your joints. As you march, keep your chest open and your back straight. Start slow with low knees, and begin lifting your knees higher as you warm up. Ten seconds to go — three, two, one. Time for more squats for lower body strength. Squat slowly until your hips are about even with your knees. Extend your arms forward for balance. Remember to keep your knees behind your toes. Ten seconds to go — three, two, one. Push-ups with twist can add variety to your upper body workout. To stay balanced, finish the push-up before starting the twist. If you can’t stay straight from head to knees, bending at the hips, like Jillian is doing, lightens the weight on your arms. Ten seconds to go — three, two, one. Bicycle crunches target your core. Keep your shoulder blades lifted off the floor to make sure you’re working your upper abs. If it’s more comfortable, you can cradle your head in your hands. Don’t forget to breathe. Ten seconds to go — three, two, one. Congratulations! You just completed your six-minute workout. Grab some water. In a few seconds, we’re going to cool down with two easy yoga stretches. This is the cat cow pose. Start in a tabletop position. As you inhale, arch your back and press your belly towards the floor. Then, exhale and round your spine towards the ceiling. Do this for 10 deep, slow breaths. Now let’s finish in Shavasana. Empty your mind and relax into the floor. Take a moment to check in with your body and how it feels. Congratulate yourself for all you did today. Stay here for as long as you like.Videos by Alexandra Eaton, Jaspal Riyait, Tara Parker-Pope, Eden Weingart and United Labor. Art direction by Jaspal Riyait.Advertisement