https://www.nytimes.com/2020/05/15/podcasts/the-daily/television-restaurants-quarantine.html
A Bit of Relief: Reruns, Rituals and Restaurants - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
298
AdvertisementtranscriptBecause I have a very sedentary job even by sedentary job standards, I like to do squats in my chair. I will just lift myself up. People at home won’t see this, but I literally like to — just every once in a while, this yogic squat is very — malasana, I think they call it. This is just really good for your legs every hour or something like that.Hi, I’m James Poniewozik, and I’m a TV critic for The New York Times.Other than the fear of death and social collapse and economic catastrophe, the day-to-day of my life has not really changed that much. I always work from home. This thing that everybody is dealing with now — you know, how do I keep myself from going insane if I don’t go outside — that’s been my life for years. We’re all kind of stay-at-home TV critics now. Welcome to my world, America. Particularly as a TV critic, I’m very attuned to the fact that there is a lot of language of shame that is built around our consumption of TV. People who watch TV are couch potatoes. And there might be a feeling that if you’re quarantined inside and watching six episodes of something on Netflix, that you’re doing something shameful and unproductive. And I am here to tell you, as a professional TV watcher, that you should not feel ashamed.Consuming entertainment, experiencing good or even brilliantly dumb art is a form of self-care. It is something salutary that you are doing for your brain. To help your brain deal with the often painful process of living in the world in this really crazy time. Art, whether it is a marble statue or a network sitcom, is human beings trying to express something that they can’t express in literal language, and how to process all of the overwhelming things that humans have to deal with. Honestly, that was probably a big aspect of my childhood. I think my parents and I often communicated with each other more through the shows we were watching at the same time than through things that we directly said to each other.I remember watching M*A*S*H during the afternoon and the early evening, when it would rerun, with my dad.My dad drove a beer and liquor delivery truck. He was a Teamster, which was a very physically punishing job. Like, he destroyed his back and his knees. And so when he would come home, he would — for some reason this felt good to him — would lie down on the living room floor in front of the TV.And my memory of watching M*A*S*H is me on the living room couch and my dad in front of me, maybe propped up on one arm on the floor, watching the TV sort of at my feet.Beans, beans, beans, beans. Potatoes, potatoes, potatoes. Applesauce, applesauce, applesauce. You got that?My dad was not of the generation where you would, you know, you purposely do things to bond with your children. But it was something that — it was something that we did. It was a routine.How’d he take it, Frank?Are you kidding? My palms are sweating off. I’m afraid to tell him.You better show him the orders, Radar.He’ll hit me.So right now it’s my wife and I, and we have two kids at home. My younger son’s in high school. My older son is in his first year of college and is now around the house. And — — we’re not really a sports family. But “Survivor,” it’s our competition. There is a great deal of meta “Survivor” analysis that occupies much of the time in our household.Go!I tend to get shushed a lot while we’re watching “Survivor.”— right in it!Because I make comments or have questions for my son, the “Survivor” expert —You didn’t do anything! You were made fun of! And you come here and you —— that kind of break the spell or interrupt somebody’s dialogue. And then somebody has to rewind.You didn’t do anything! You were made fun of! And you come here, and you tell me, don’t bite the hand that feeds you? I feed myself!And I’m in trouble, and I am reminded that watching “Survivor” is a privilege and not a right.I took myself out of this game!I’ve been watching “Bob’s Burgers.” That’s the show that just Andre and I — my younger son and I — watch together. My wife is not particularly into the show. My older son can take it or leave it. So that will be if everybody else has gone to bed or is doing something else. And we do have a little dance that we do sitting on the couch. There’s the theme song. It’s on I think ukulele. Dun, dun, dun, dun, dun, dun, dun.And there’s this, like, percussion thing. Boom! And we lean into each other and bump shoulders. Boom! Back the other way. Boom! And bump shoulders again. Just us.What are some of other regular shows? My older son, who’s a music major in college, he was able to airdrum, beginning to end, all the percussion moments in the “Friday Night Lights” theme song. He had all these gestures that I can’t reproduce or whatever.This is one of the most beautiful shows ever made for television that’s not just about football.Everybody wrote us off. Everybody.But about community. About the connection among people. And about how a society needs every one of its members to contribute for the good of all.There are a few out there who do still believe in you, few’ll never give up on you. You go back out on the field. Those are the people I want in your minds. Those are the people I want in your hearts.Never underestimate just how much you need to hear Coach Taylor.Clear eyes, full hearts.Can’t lose! Let’s go!I can’t change the fact that every human on earth has a real existential problem right now. And I can’t change how, even some of the shows that I love and that simply entertained me before are now, in many ways, painful reminders. But I can deal with them, and make it a little easier to tolerate, and even enjoy getting through it, through the people that I watch with and through the rituals that we have of watching. Sharing TV with people you love, whether they’re with you or on the other end of a Zoom chat, can be a really valuable way to get through this.Hi, I’m Tejal Rao. I’m the California restaurant critic for The New York Times, and I’m also a columnist for The New York Times Magazine. Well, it’s been really strange, because there isn’t much use for restaurant criticism right now. The restaurant industry is suffering, and so many restaurant workers are out of work. And I’m really, really worried. I’m really missing going out to restaurants and being in public spaces, and the luxury of other people cooking for me. And I’m cooking a lot at home, but I’m also doing this really slightly strange thing, which is rewatching food scenes in movies that I love. Because I haven’t had that kind of contact in public spaces, and restaurants are so important to me. So there’s something about seeing people being together, and cooking, and eating in a film or in a TV show that’s just really doing it for me right now.OK, so over the weekend, I watched “Big Night.”[SINGING IN ITALIAN]So I intended to just watch the dinner scene, which is kind of an epic, Italian-style dinner, set in the 1950s. But when the movie opened, its Claudio Villa singing this very beautiful song with his operatic voice.[SINGING IN ITALIAN]Waves are rolling on the Jersey shore, and I just ended up watching the whole movie. I feel like I just want to explain a tiny bit of the movie to you. So —What?It’s about two brothers.More salt.Stanley Tucci, Tony Shalhoub.Not too fine. Sometimes you cut it too fine, then all you taste is the garlic.Who are running a restaurant on the Jersey shore. And it’s a classic setup. The restaurant across the street from them is super successful. Meanwhile, their restaurant is really quiet, kind of failing. They owe the bank a lot of money. And part of it is that they just refuse to cook Italian-American food.But I get a side order of spaghetti with this, right?Why?Well, no.I thought all main courses come with spaghetti.Well some, yes. But, you see, risotto is rice, so it is a starch. And it doesn’t go really with pasta.You know, people want spaghetti with meatballs, and they want tons of seafood in their risotto.There are no meatballs with the spaghetti?No. Sometimes spaghetti likes to be alone. [LAUGHTER]And Tony Shalhoub plays this perfectionist chef, who refuses to compromise.Just make me a side order of spaghetti please.What? Why?She likes starch. I don’t know! Come on!And they only want to make very traditional Italian stuff.Who are these people in America? She’s a criminal. I want to talk to her.There are moments — I don’t want to be mean to Stanley Tucci — but there are moments, where it’s almost like, you know how the French accents are in “Monty Python?”I don’t want to talk to you no more, you empty-headed —Where they’re just so absurd and silly and over-the-top.I fart in your general direction.There are few moments where —They both are a starch. Maybe I should make a mashed potato for on the other side.— their Italian accents get a little cartoonish.She’s a Philistine. I’m not going to talk to her. She no understand anyway.But it’s so charming. It’s so charming all the same that it’s fine.[SINGING IN ITALIAN]One of my favorite moments is just, like, Stanley Tucci and Tony Shalhoub’s hairy forearms making the pasta. There’s something about seeing these bare, hairy forearms making a huge mess with egg yolks and flour, and kneading it directly on the table, where one of the cooks also sleeps.We’re all being so careful right now, as we should be, with gloves and masks. And the intimacy of the two of them cooking together and also cooking for other people, it’s a really, really beautiful scene.So, the rival restaurant across the street that’s doing really well, it’s run by this showboat restauranteur, who lights stuff on fire to create a scene in the dining room. And the brothers run this very quiet, simple restaurant. And the rival restauranteur says, you know what? I’m friends with Louis Prima, and he’s coming to town next week. And I’ll tell him to come to your restaurant. So why don’t you cook a special dinner for Louis Prima. And so they plan this big night to cook for a celebrity. And they’re waiting and waiting. And people start drinking and dancing and eating snacks. Wisps of hair coming undone, because people are starting to get a little wild. And they just sit down to eat dinner without Louis Prima.No, no, no. We don’t have time for tour. Let’s go. Come on. Come on. [INAUDIBLE] open the door.That’s where the magic of the movie happens. It’s all at the table.What is that?It’s timpano. It’s a secret recipe that they brought from their hometown.They’re in this very plain dining room. The music is blasting, and there’s always this moment at a dinner party when all of a sudden, people have had just enough to drink that they sort of start to loosen up. And you see it happen in real time in the movie.[DISHES CLATTERING]Dammit!This is so [EXPLETIVE] good, I should kill you.All of a sudden —[LAUGHTER AND CHATTER]— all the glasses start clinking.People are holding wine bottles and pretending to karaoke into them. And dancing. You can see all these women with their perfect red lips unobscured by masks. And everyone’s making sure that everyone else’s glasses stay full all the time. It was like catnip for me. And it also emotionally kind of wrecked me to see people having so much fun. There’s something magical about seeing restaurants that are really, really alive and busy, and financially successful probably, too. It’s so fortifying to remember that we can gather like that again on the other side of this.transcriptBecause I have a very sedentary job even by sedentary job standards, I like to do squats in my chair. I will just lift myself up. People at home won’t see this, but I literally like to — just every once in a while, this yogic squat is very — malasana, I think they call it. This is just really good for your legs every hour or something like that.Hi, I’m James Poniewozik, and I’m a TV critic for The New York Times.Other than the fear of death and social collapse and economic catastrophe, the day-to-day of my life has not really changed that much. I always work from home. This thing that everybody is dealing with now — you know, how do I keep myself from going insane if I don’t go outside — that’s been my life for years. We’re all kind of stay-at-home TV critics now. Welcome to my world, America. Particularly as a TV critic, I’m very attuned to the fact that there is a lot of language of shame that is built around our consumption of TV. People who watch TV are couch potatoes. And there might be a feeling that if you’re quarantined inside and watching six episodes of something on Netflix, that you’re doing something shameful and unproductive. And I am here to tell you, as a professional TV watcher, that you should not feel ashamed.Consuming entertainment, experiencing good or even brilliantly dumb art is a form of self-care. It is something salutary that you are doing for your brain. To help your brain deal with the often painful process of living in the world in this really crazy time. Art, whether it is a marble statue or a network sitcom, is human beings trying to express something that they can’t express in literal language, and how to process all of the overwhelming things that humans have to deal with. Honestly, that was probably a big aspect of my childhood. I think my parents and I often communicated with each other more through the shows we were watching at the same time than through things that we directly said to each other.I remember watching M*A*S*H during the afternoon and the early evening, when it would rerun, with my dad.My dad drove a beer and liquor delivery truck. He was a Teamster, which was a very physically punishing job. Like, he destroyed his back and his knees. And so when he would come home, he would — for some reason this felt good to him — would lie down on the living room floor in front of the TV.And my memory of watching M*A*S*H is me on the living room couch and my dad in front of me, maybe propped up on one arm on the floor, watching the TV sort of at my feet.Beans, beans, beans, beans. Potatoes, potatoes, potatoes. Applesauce, applesauce, applesauce. You got that?My dad was not of the generation where you would, you know, you purposely do things to bond with your children. But it was something that — it was something that we did. It was a routine.How’d he take it, Frank?Are you kidding? My palms are sweating off. I’m afraid to tell him.You better show him the orders, Radar.He’ll hit me.So right now it’s my wife and I, and we have two kids at home. My younger son’s in high school. My older son is in his first year of college and is now around the house. And — — we’re not really a sports family. But “Survivor,” it’s our competition. There is a great deal of meta “Survivor” analysis that occupies much of the time in our household.Go!I tend to get shushed a lot while we’re watching “Survivor.”— right in it!Because I make comments or have questions for my son, the “Survivor” expert —You didn’t do anything! You were made fun of! And you come here and you —— that kind of break the spell or interrupt somebody’s dialogue. And then somebody has to rewind.You didn’t do anything! You were made fun of! And you come here, and you tell me, don’t bite the hand that feeds you? I feed myself!And I’m in trouble, and I am reminded that watching “Survivor” is a privilege and not a right.I took myself out of this game!I’ve been watching “Bob’s Burgers.” That’s the show that just Andre and I — my younger son and I — watch together. My wife is not particularly into the show. My older son can take it or leave it. So that will be if everybody else has gone to bed or is doing something else. And we do have a little dance that we do sitting on the couch. There’s the theme song. It’s on I think ukulele. Dun, dun, dun, dun, dun, dun, dun.And there’s this, like, percussion thing. Boom! And we lean into each other and bump shoulders. Boom! Back the other way. Boom! And bump shoulders again. Just us.What are some of other regular shows? My older son, who’s a music major in college, he was able to airdrum, beginning to end, all the percussion moments in the “Friday Night Lights” theme song. He had all these gestures that I can’t reproduce or whatever.This is one of the most beautiful shows ever made for television that’s not just about football.Everybody wrote us off. Everybody.But about community. About the connection among people. And about how a society needs every one of its members to contribute for the good of all.There are a few out there who do still believe in you, few’ll never give up on you. You go back out on the field. Those are the people I want in your minds. Those are the people I want in your hearts.Never underestimate just how much you need to hear Coach Taylor.Clear eyes, full hearts.Can’t lose! Let’s go!I can’t change the fact that every human on earth has a real existential problem right now. And I can’t change how, even some of the shows that I love and that simply entertained me before are now, in many ways, painful reminders. But I can deal with them, and make it a little easier to tolerate, and even enjoy getting through it, through the people that I watch with and through the rituals that we have of watching. Sharing TV with people you love, whether they’re with you or on the other end of a Zoom chat, can be a really valuable way to get through this.Hi, I’m Tejal Rao. I’m the California restaurant critic for The New York Times, and I’m also a columnist for The New York Times Magazine. Well, it’s been really strange, because there isn’t much use for restaurant criticism right now. The restaurant industry is suffering, and so many restaurant workers are out of work. And I’m really, really worried. I’m really missing going out to restaurants and being in public spaces, and the luxury of other people cooking for me. And I’m cooking a lot at home, but I’m also doing this really slightly strange thing, which is rewatching food scenes in movies that I love. Because I haven’t had that kind of contact in public spaces, and restaurants are so important to me. So there’s something about seeing people being together, and cooking, and eating in a film or in a TV show that’s just really doing it for me right now.OK, so over the weekend, I watched “Big Night.”[SINGING IN ITALIAN]So I intended to just watch the dinner scene, which is kind of an epic, Italian-style dinner, set in the 1950s. But when the movie opened, its Claudio Villa singing this very beautiful song with his operatic voice.[SINGING IN ITALIAN]Waves are rolling on the Jersey shore, and I just ended up watching the whole movie. I feel like I just want to explain a tiny bit of the movie to you. So —What?It’s about two brothers.More salt.Stanley Tucci, Tony Shalhoub.Not too fine. Sometimes you cut it too fine, then all you taste is the garlic.Who are running a restaurant on the Jersey shore. And it’s a classic setup. The restaurant across the street from them is super successful. Meanwhile, their restaurant is really quiet, kind of failing. They owe the bank a lot of money. And part of it is that they just refuse to cook Italian-American food.But I get a side order of spaghetti with this, right?Why?Well, no.I thought all main courses come with spaghetti.Well some, yes. But, you see, risotto is rice, so it is a starch. And it doesn’t go really with pasta.You know, people want spaghetti with meatballs, and they want tons of seafood in their risotto.There are no meatballs with the spaghetti?No. Sometimes spaghetti likes to be alone. [LAUGHTER]And Tony Shalhoub plays this perfectionist chef, who refuses to compromise.Just make me a side order of spaghetti please.What? Why?She likes starch. I don’t know! Come on!And they only want to make very traditional Italian stuff.Who are these people in America? She’s a criminal. I want to talk to her.There are moments — I don’t want to be mean to Stanley Tucci — but there are moments, where it’s almost like, you know how the French accents are in “Monty Python?”I don’t want to talk to you no more, you empty-headed —Where they’re just so absurd and silly and over-the-top.I fart in your general direction.There are few moments where —They both are a starch. Maybe I should make a mashed potato for on the other side.— their Italian accents get a little cartoonish.She’s a Philistine. I’m not going to talk to her. She no understand anyway.But it’s so charming. It’s so charming all the same that it’s fine.[SINGING IN ITALIAN]One of my favorite moments is just, like, Stanley Tucci and Tony Shalhoub’s hairy forearms making the pasta. There’s something about seeing these bare, hairy forearms making a huge mess with egg yolks and flour, and kneading it directly on the table, where one of the cooks also sleeps.We’re all being so careful right now, as we should be, with gloves and masks. And the intimacy of the two of them cooking together and also cooking for other people, it’s a really, really beautiful scene.So, the rival restaurant across the street that’s doing really well, it’s run by this showboat restauranteur, who lights stuff on fire to create a scene in the dining room. And the brothers run this very quiet, simple restaurant. And the rival restauranteur says, you know what? I’m friends with Louis Prima, and he’s coming to town next week. And I’ll tell him to come to your restaurant. So why don’t you cook a special dinner for Louis Prima. And so they plan this big night to cook for a celebrity. And they’re waiting and waiting. And people start drinking and dancing and eating snacks. Wisps of hair coming undone, because people are starting to get a little wild. And they just sit down to eat dinner without Louis Prima.No, no, no. We don’t have time for tour. Let’s go. Come on. Come on. [INAUDIBLE] open the door.That’s where the magic of the movie happens. It’s all at the table.What is that?It’s timpano. It’s a secret recipe that they brought from their hometown.They’re in this very plain dining room. The music is blasting, and there’s always this moment at a dinner party when all of a sudden, people have had just enough to drink that they sort of start to loosen up. And you see it happen in real time in the movie.[DISHES CLATTERING]Dammit!This is so [EXPLETIVE] good, I should kill you.All of a sudden —[LAUGHTER AND CHATTER]— all the glasses start clinking.People are holding wine bottles and pretending to karaoke into them. And dancing. You can see all these women with their perfect red lips unobscured by masks. And everyone’s making sure that everyone else’s glasses stay full all the time. It was like catnip for me. And it also emotionally kind of wrecked me to see people having so much fun. There’s something magical about seeing restaurants that are really, really alive and busy, and financially successful probably, too. It’s so fortifying to remember that we can gather like that again on the other side of this.Listen and subscribe to our podcast from your mobile device:Via Apple Podcasts | Via Spotify | Via StitcherToday, two critics at The Times share the activities they’re leaning on for comfort and escape.For the television critic James Poniewozik, it’s binge-watching television with his wife and kids, and the random rituals that start to crystallize (like shushing one another during “Survivor” and dancing through the “Bob’s Burger’s” theme song).And for the restaurant critic Tejal Rao, rewatching cinematic food scenes — the clinking of cups, the comedy of errors in the kitchen, the magic of a dinner gathering — is a comforting reminder of life on the other side.On today’s episode:James Poniewozik, the chief television critic for The Times.Tejal Rao, the California restaurant critic for The Times and a columnist for The Magazine.Tune in, and tell us what you think. Email us at thedaily@nytimes.com. Follow James Poniewozik and Tejal Rao on Twitter: @poniewozik and @tejalrao. And if you’re interested in advertising with “The Daily,” write to us at thedaily-ads@nytimes.com.James Poniewozik and Tejal Rao contributed reporting.“The Daily” is made by Theo Balcomb, Andy Mills, Lisa Tobin, Rachel Quester, Lynsea Garrison, Annie Brown, Clare Toeniskoetter, Paige Cowett, Michael Simon Johnson, Brad Fisher, Larissa Anderson, Wendy Dorr, Chris Wood, Jessica Cheung, Stella Tan, Alexandra Leigh Young, Jonathan Wolfe, Lisa Chow, Eric Krupke, Marc Georges, Luke Vander Ploeg, Adizah Eghan, Kelly Prime, Julia Longoria, Sindhu Gnanasambandan, M.J. Davis Lin, Austin Mitchell, Sayre Quevedo, Neena Pathak, Dan Powell, Dave Shaw, Sydney Harper, Daniel Guillemette, Hans Buetow, Robert Jimison, Mike Benoist, Bianca Giaever and Asthaa Chaturvedi. Our theme music is by Jim Brunberg and Ben Landsverk of Wonderly. Special thanks to Sam Dolnick, Mikayla Bouchard, Lauren Jackson, Julia Simon, Mahima Chablani and Nora Keller.Advertisement