https://www.nytimes.com/article/small-business-loans-stimulus-grants-freelancers-coronavirus.html
Coronavirus Small Businesses Stimulus F.A.Q.: PPP, Loans and More - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
193
AdvertisementSupported byMany small companies and nonprofits are eligible for federal grants and low-interest loans. But red tape abounds.By Stacy CowleyThe federal stimulus bills enacted last month, including a bipartisan $2 trillion economic relief plan, offer help for the millions of American small businesses affected by the coronavirus pandemic.The provisions include cash grants, low-interest loans and payments to offset eight weeks of payroll costs for businesses that retain workers or rehire those they have laid off. There are also enhancements to unemployment insurance and paid leave that affect small businesses.Here are the answers to common questions about these programs. We’ll update this article as we learn more about the details.More information on help, including details on the stimulus checks that many people will be receiving, can be found in our F.A.Q. for individuals about stimulus relief and our Hub for Help. If you have questions, or have applied for small business aid and can tell us how the process went, we’d love to hear from you.Who is eligible for relief?Businesses and nonprofit organizations with fewer than 500 workers are eligible for aid, including sole proprietorships, independent contractors and freelancers. Larger companies in some industries are also eligible.What help is being offered?There are two main federal aid programs, which are being managed by the Small Business Administration. Business owners can get help from both at the same time, but there are some restrictions.The paycheck protection program is a forgivable loan intended to pay for eight weeks of a business’s payroll costs, so the company can retain workers or hire back those it has already laid off.The government has also expanded the existing economic injury disaster loan program, which offers low-interest loans to cover most business expenses. A portion of those loans do not have to be paid back.Will the money for these programs run out?Probably yes, and possibly quickly. Both programs have limited funding and are first come first served. The Trump administration has asked Congress for at least $250 billion more for the paycheck program.See below for the specifics of each program.What does this do?The program offers loans of up to $10 million to cover eight weeks of payroll plus some additional expenses, like rent and utilities.The loan can effectively turn into a grant. Most, and in some cases all, of the loan will be forgiven if a company uses the money to retain workers or hire back positions it had to cut. The S.B.A. has waived many of its usual requirements for these loans and will not require collateral for them.How does the loan forgiveness work?Both full and partial forgiveness is available.Businesses can have their loans forgiven in full if they maintain their full-time equivalent head count (based on a 40-hour workweek) and wages for eight weeks after the loan is disbursed, the Treasury Department said. The agency said that “not more than 25 percent” of the forgiven amount may be used for nonpayroll costs, like rent.Forgiveness will be “reduced” for companies that trim their head count or cut workers’ wages by more than 25 percent, the Treasury said. Also, businesses can borrow and have forgiven only the first $100,000 in payroll for each employee.If a business uses money from the economic injury disaster loan program to cover payroll, it can try to refinance it through the paycheck protection program and be eligible for forgiveness.How much can I borrow?Companies can borrow up to two months of their average monthly payroll costs for the past year, plus an additional 25 percent, up to $10 million. “Payroll costs” include salary, wages, tips, commissions, paid leave benefits, employer-paid health insurance premiums, and state and local payroll taxes.What if I already laid off my workers?You can still have your loan forgiven if you hire them back before the loan money hits your bank account.The program generally uses Feb. 15, 2020, for calculating your pre-pandemic payroll. (Seasonal businesses can use a different date.) As long as workers laid off after that date are brought back (or new workers are hired), the layoffs don’t affect a borrower’s eligibility for full forgiveness.Business that need time to bring back workers will have to move fast. The eight-week clock begins on the date that the loan is disbursed to the borrower, the Treasury Department said. Lenders must make that payout no more than 10 calendar days after the loan is approved, the agency said.I’m self-employed. How do I calculate my payroll cost?The CARES Act text says that you can claim your “wage, commission, income, net earnings from self-employment or similar compensation,” up to $100,000 a year. You may need to work with your accountant or lender to confirm what qualifies.I have a lot of part-time workers and independent contractors. Can I include them in my payroll calculation?You can use the loan to cover payments to your part-time employees, based on their pre-pandemic average hours and earnings.But independent contractors and gig workers aren’t covered in your payroll calculation. They are eligible to apply for their own paycheck protection program loans.How do I apply?You must apply through a bank or other lender, so start by contacting one you already have a relationship with. Many banks are imposing restrictions and choosing to work only with their existing business customers.The Treasury Department has said it wants financial technology companies and lenders that have not traditionally participated in S.B.A. programs to make paycheck program loans, but there’s significant red tape involved. More of those lenders might join the program in the coming weeks. The S.B.A. has a search tool to help you find nearby lenders, but, again, they may not take new customers.Some lenders have said they will work with new customers. They include Kabbage, an online lender that teamed up with a bank; Radius Bank (which is also funding loans through several partners, including NorthOne, a digital bank); and Fountainhead and Ready Capital, two nonbank lenders already approved to make S.B.A. loans. If you are a lender accepting new customers, please send us a note.Why does my bank say it’s not ready to take applications yet?There have been a lot of problems getting the program off the ground as quickly as promised.The Treasury Department said the program would start taking applications on April 3, a week after the bill was signed into law. But the department didn’t give lenders necessary technical information until just hours before the program was scheduled to start — and lenders are still waiting for some key guidance and documents, bankers said. Many are still developing their application rules and systems.Applications opened on April 10 for business owners who are sole proprietors, such as freelancers and independent contractors.How much hardship do I have to have to apply?There are no specific requirements. You do not need to prove a sharp drop in sales or a forced business closing, for example.Applicants simply have to certify that “current economic uncertainty makes this loan request necessary” to support their ongoing operations.What documents do I need?Each lender will set its own rules, but this sample loan application covers the basics. You’ll need to document your average monthly payroll for the past 12 months and provide records on other expenses you’re looking to cover, like rent and utilities.Once it’s time to ask for the loan to be forgiven, expect your lender to ask for more documentation.What if my loan is only partly forgiven?You’ll have two years to pay off the balance, at a 1 percent interest rate. No payments are due for the first six months after you get the loan.What’s the application deadline?June 30.That’s the date Congress set for disbursement of the $349 billion it allocated for the program, but the money is likely to run out faster. That means some applicants will be turned away unless Congress authorizes more funding. On Tuesday, the Treasury Department said it would request at least another $200 billion.What does this program do?This is a longstanding program offering low-interest loans of up to $2 million for businesses that have suffered losses from some kind of disaster. The loans are made directly by the S.B.A., and you can apply on its website. You don’t have to go through a bank.Federal legislation in response to the pandemic committed more money and relaxed some of the S.B.A.’s usual requirements for disaster loans. It also added a provision essentially offering applicants small grants.However, demand for the program has overwhelmed the S.B.A., and funding appears to be running out. Many applicants said they have been told that initial disbursements will be capped at $15,000 per business. S.B.A. representatives did not respond to repeated questions about whether caps have been imposed.Does this program offer loan forgiveness?Partly. Businesses can request up to $10,000 of a disaster loan as a grant. It’s described on the application as a “loan advance,” but S.B.A. officials confirmed that it did not have to be repaid. Borrowers will be on the hook for the rest.The CARES Act made the $10,000 grant available to any qualified applicants, whether they are approved for a loan or not. But the S.B.A. appears to be imposing an additional restriction: A spokeswoman said the amount available to any individual business would be “based on the number of predisaster employees.”The agency did not respond to questions about how the formula will work. A message posted on the website of Senator Brian Schatz, Democrat of Hawaii, a member of the Senate Banking Committee, said the S.B.A. had limited the advance and was providing $1,000 per employee for up to 10 employees.What do I need to know about repayment?The rest of the loan can be repaid on a term of up to 30 years. The interest rate is 3.75 percent for small businesses and 2.75 percent for nonprofits. No payment is due for the first year.Is there a catch?Yes, but it’s not as big as before.Usually, disaster loans require a “personal guarantee” of repayment, meaning that the S.B.A. can seize your personal assets — like your house, if you own one — if you default.Updated May 28, 2020States are reopening bit by bit. This means that more public spaces are available for use and more and more businesses are being allowed to open again. The federal government is largely leaving the decision up to states, and some state leaders are leaving the decision up to local authorities. Even if you aren’t being told to stay at home, it’s still a good idea to limit trips outside and your interaction with other people.Touching contaminated objects and then infecting ourselves with the germs is not typically how the virus spreads. But it can happen. A number of studies of flu, rhinovirus, coronavirus and other microbes have shown that respiratory illnesses, including the new coronavirus, can spread by touching contaminated surfaces, particularly in places like day care centers, offices and hospitals. But a long chain of events has to happen for the disease to spread that way. The best way to protect yourself from coronavirus — whether it’s surface transmission or close human contact — is still social distancing, washing your hands, not touching your face and wearing masks.Common symptoms include fever, a dry cough, fatigue and difficulty breathing or shortness of breath. Some of these symptoms overlap with those of the flu, making detection difficult, but runny noses and stuffy sinuses are less common. The C.D.C. has also added chills, muscle pain, sore throat, headache and a new loss of the sense of taste or smell as symptoms to look out for. Most people fall ill five to seven days after exposure, but symptoms may appear in as few as two days or as many as 14 days.If air travel is unavoidable, there are some steps you can take to protect yourself. Most important: Wash your hands often, and stop touching your face. If possible, choose a window seat. A study from Emory University found that during flu season, the safest place to sit on a plane is by a window, as people sitting in window seats had less contact with potentially sick people. Disinfect hard surfaces. When you get to your seat and your hands are clean, use disinfecting wipes to clean the hard surfaces at your seat like the head and arm rest, the seatbelt buckle, the remote, screen, seat back pocket and the tray table. If the seat is hard and nonporous or leather or pleather, you can wipe that down, too. (Using wipes on upholstered seats could lead to a wet seat and spreading of germs rather than killing them.)More than 40 million people — the equivalent of 1 in 4 U.S. workers — have filed for unemployment benefits since the pandemic took hold. One in five who were working in February reported losing a job or being furloughed in March or the beginning of April, data from a Federal Reserve survey released on May 14 showed, and that pain was highly concentrated among low earners. Fully 39 percent of former workers living in a household earning $40,000 or less lost work, compared with 13 percent in those making more than $100,000, a Fed official said.There is an uptick in people reporting symptoms of chilblains, which are painful red or purple lesions that typically appear in the winter on fingers or toes. The lesions are emerging as yet another symptom of infection with the new coronavirus. Chilblains are caused by inflammation in small blood vessels in reaction to cold or damp conditions, but they are usually common in the coldest winter months. Federal health officials do not include toe lesions in the list of coronavirus symptoms, but some dermatologists are pushing for a change, saying so-called Covid toe should be sufficient grounds for testing.Yes, but make sure you keep six feet of distance between you and people who don’t live in your home. Even if you just hang out in a park, rather than go for a jog or a walk, getting some fresh air, and hopefully sunshine, is a good idea.Taking one’s temperature to look for signs of fever is not as easy as it sounds, as “normal” temperature numbers can vary, but generally, keep an eye out for a temperature of 100.5 degrees Fahrenheit or higher. If you don’t have a thermometer (they can be pricey these days), there are other ways to figure out if you have a fever, or are at risk of Covid-19 complications.The C.D.C. has recommended that all Americans wear cloth masks if they go out in public. This is a shift in federal guidance reflecting new concerns that the coronavirus is being spread by infected people who have no symptoms. Until now, the C.D.C., like the W.H.O., has advised that ordinary people don’t need to wear masks unless they are sick and coughing. Part of the reason was to preserve medical-grade masks for health care workers who desperately need them at a time when they are in continuously short supply. Masks don’t replace hand washing and social distancing.If you’ve been exposed to the coronavirus or think you have, and have a fever or symptoms like a cough or difficulty breathing, call a doctor. They should give you advice on whether you should be tested, how to get tested, and how to seek medical treatment without potentially infecting or exposing others.If you’re sick and you think you’ve been exposed to the new coronavirus, the C.D.C. recommends that you call your healthcare provider and explain your symptoms and fears. They will decide if you need to be tested. Keep in mind that there’s a chance — because of a lack of testing kits or because you’re asymptomatic, for instance — you won’t be able to get tested.Charity Navigator, which evaluates charities using a numbers-based system, has a running list of nonprofits working in communities affected by the outbreak. You can give blood through the American Red Cross, and World Central Kitchen has stepped in to distribute meals in major cities.But in response to the pandemic, the S.B.A. is changing that.It will not require a personal guarantee on loans of less than $200,000. Business assets, like machinery and equipment, can be used to secure loans of up to $500,000, an agency spokeswoman said.Larger loans will require real estate — whether it’s your business’s or your own — if you have it. If you don’t, the agency said, it will not turn borrowers away because they lack collateral.What documents do I need to apply?The online loan application is designed to be simple and can be completed in about 15 minutes. You’ll need to know your business’s gross revenues and cost of goods sold for the 12 months that ended Jan. 31, 2020.When the agency processes your loan, it may request additional material, including federal tax returns and a year-to-date profit-and-loss statement.When will I get the money?The CARES Act ordered the S.B.A. to disburse up to $10,000 — the portion that does not have to be repaid — within three days of receiving an application from an owner who self-certifies that he or she is eligible for the aid.That time frame is not being met. More than 400 applicants who contacted The New York Times said they had been waiting a week or longer, some for nearly a month.In normal times, it typically takes around two weeks for the S.B.A. to make a decision on a disaster loan application, and up to a week after that for the loan check to be disbursed. It is currently running weeks behind that schedule.How much can I borrow?For these loans, you don’t request an amount. The S.B.A. will determine how much you can borrow using a formula intended to approximate six months of your operating expenses.To calculate that, the agency will generally subtract the cost of goods sold from revenue and loan you up to half of that sum.But because of high demand, the S.B.A. has told many borrowers that, at least initially, it will lend them only up to two months of working capital, capped at $15,000.What can I use the money for?The loans cannot be used to refinance previous loans; anything else is fair game. If you use money from a disaster loan to pay your employees, you can try to refinance through the paycheck protection program, which allows for the loan to be forgiven.What’s the application deadline?Portions of the program, like the $10,000 grants, end on Dec. 30, 2020.I’m a freelancer or sole proprietor. Am I eligible for unemployment if I’m no longer working?Yes. Self-employed people are newly eligible for benefits, including the additional $600 weekly benefit provided by the federal government as part of the CARES Act.Our guide for self-employed workers has more details.If my business is still operating, do I need to provide my workers with paid family leave and paid sick leave?It depends on how big your company is.A new law requires businesses with fewer than 500 workers to give qualified workers two weeks of paid sick leave if they are ill, quarantined or seeking diagnosis or preventive care for coronavirus, or if they are caring for sick family members. It gives 12 weeks of paid leave to people caring for children whose schools are closed or whose child care provider is unavailable because of the coronavirus. There is a daily maximum amount, and the government will reimburse employers.Companies with fewer than 50 employees can opt out of providing paid leave for the care of children whose school or day care is closed, but they must still give their employees paid sick leave. Companies with more than 500 employees are not obligated to give either kind of leave.Employers can claim refundable tax credits to cover the cost of their employees’ leave. Our F.A.Q. on the paid leave law has more information on the specifics.I’m having trouble paying my bills. What can I do?If you already have a loan backed by the S.B.A., there’s good news: The agency is paying in full for six months the monthly payments (principal and interest) on existing loans and any new ones made before Sept. 27, 2020. The relief applies to borrowers with 7(a), 504 and microloans. Congress estimates that will help 320,000 borrowers.Borrowers with existing disaster loans are eligible for a payment deferral through the end of the year, but interest will continue to accrue.Many banks, landlords and other creditors have said that they will work with borrowers affected by the pandemic, but it is generally up to them what aid, if any, they are willing to offer.I’m keeping some or all of my workers, and I don’t want a loan. Is anything else available?The employee retention credit is a refundable tax credit for employers of all sizes who hang on to their workers through the pandemic. It offers a 50 percent credit on up to $10,000 in wages per employee, meaning the credit will be for up to $5,000 per worker. It’s available on wages paid between March 12, 2020, and Jan. 1, 2021, and companies can file with the I.R.S. for an advance payment on the credit.Companies are eligible if the government ordered them to fully or partially close, or if they have a drop of at least 50 percent in their gross receipts. Eligible businesses with fewer than 100 workers can claim the credit, even if their employees kept working through the crisis.However, the credit is not available to companies that take out a paycheck protection program loan. (You can still claim the credit if you take out an economic injury disaster loan.)Tara Siegel Bernard and Claire Cain Miller contributed reporting.Advertisement