https://www.nytimes.com/article/coronavirus-temperature-fever-thermometer.html
Coronavirus and Fever Temperature: Tracking Symptoms with Thermometer - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
46
AdvertisementSupported byTaking one’s temperature to look for signs of fever is not as easy as it sounds. For one reporter, the first challenge was finding a thermometer.By Shefali Luthra, Kaiser Health NewsAfter I was told I’d been exposed to the novel coronavirus, I tried to follow the best medical advice. I started working from home. I socially isolated. And I “self-monitored” for signs I’d been infected.Or, at least, I tried to.Covid-19 symptoms seem pretty clear. The dry cough and difficulty breathing. Fatigue. And the fever.To track all that, the federal Centers for Disease Control and Prevention recommends people who may have been exposed take their temperature twice daily. As someone who covers the outbreak, I understand the soundness of this advice. There’s a nationwide shortage of coronavirus diagnostics, so health care providers are trying to reserve tests for people who have been exposed, are symptomatic or are at clear risk of dangerous complications.What the C.D.C.’s guidelines don’t note: Taking your temperature can be surprisingly difficult.Especially because, like most of my 20-something friends, I don’t own a thermometer. (I do have a candy thermometer, but those aren’t useful here. A meat thermometer wouldn’t be, either.) I called my local CVS. They were sold out. Another friend told me he had checked four stores in our neighborhood and come up empty-handed. My twin brother was able to find one — but he lives in Connecticut, almost 400 miles from me.When I checked online, I discovered I’d have to wait weeks to months for a thermometer, unless I was willing to shell out at least $50. I was not.Since I had no symptoms — I still felt comfortable going out for a run or doing yoga in my kitchen — I decided to wait and watch. It’s been more than two weeks, officially, and my only symptoms are cabin fever and existential anxiety. Coronavirus seemed a no-show.But was that the best course of action? And what should people in my situation do?I did what any health journalist would do. I researched and called the experts.Their advice was comforting. Splurging on a pricey thermometer isn’t the right move, especially if you aren’t showing symptoms. There are other ways to figure out if you have a fever, or are at risk of Covid-19 complications. And a few principles are worth considering.First of all, for people like my brother, who was able to find a thermometer in stock and buy it, or those who actually owned one long before this need arose, the number you’re looking for varies.We’re taught the average human temperature is 98.6 degrees Fahrenheit. But that isn’t necessarily correct. Research published this year suggests that the average human body temperature is a bit lower — maybe 97.9. It differs from person to person, based on factors like body weight, height, the weather, your age or gender.“Some people are like, ‘Oh, I run a low temperature; oh, I run high.’ That’s right! There is variation,” said Dr. William Schaffner, a professor of preventive medicine and infectious diseases at Vanderbilt University.Generally, keep an eye out for a temperature of 100.5 degrees Fahrenheit or higher. But the timing matters, too. Some people running a fever might not register a high number in the morning but will by afternoon. That’s because people run cooler in the morning, and their temperature peaks in the evening, usually from 4 to 9 p.m., he told me.If you are taking your temperature twice a day, at least one of those should be done during that evening window — and ideally around the same time every day, to account for daily fluctuation.Another factor to consider when using oral thermometers, advised Dr. Leigh Vinocur, a Maryland-based physician and spokeswoman for the American College of Emergency Physicians: If you’ve just had hot coffee, or water or ice cream, wait a little bit before checking for fever.That gets at another question. Are there specific kinds of thermometers that are better than others?If you can’t find a thermometer, everyone told me — again, don’t worry. (There are lots of other things to worry about!) But if you have options, you don’t need anything fancy.High-tech models, like the smart thermometer Kinsa, track and map where people register fevers. This has been touted as a way to help predict the spread of disease. But they’re expensive. When in stock, they retail for between $35 and $69, per the manufacturer’s website.There are other digital scanning thermometers that use infrared technology to scan someone’s forehead — from a distance — and deliver an accurate temperature reading.These are the kinds used in high-traffic settings like airports, or before journalists can enter White House press briefings — scenarios in which you don’t want to stick the same thermometer in multiple people’s mouths, spreading germs. When in stock (and again, many are not), those can cost $60 or more. That doesn’t include shipping, if you’re ordering online.But those high-end devices aren’t necessary, especially at home.“You don’t have to have the most expensive one. You can get a cheap one,” urged Dr. Brad Uren, an assistant professor and emergency doctor at the University of Michigan. Simple, under-the-tongue thermometers that (normally) retail for less than $10 are more than sufficient.Actually, scanning devices can be more vulnerable to user error, said Dr. Rob Davidson, an emergency physician in Western Michigan. He has seen them misread temperatures as lower than what’s accurate.In fact, when I was still trying to buy a thermometer, one friend warned me she has seen those lower readings occur at home — a reason she refuses to buy scanning devices now. (She also doesn’t currently have a thermometer.)Updated May 28, 2020States are reopening bit by bit. This means that more public spaces are available for use and more and more businesses are being allowed to open again. The federal government is largely leaving the decision up to states, and some state leaders are leaving the decision up to local authorities. Even if you aren’t being told to stay at home, it’s still a good idea to limit trips outside and your interaction with other people.Touching contaminated objects and then infecting ourselves with the germs is not typically how the virus spreads. But it can happen. A number of studies of flu, rhinovirus, coronavirus and other microbes have shown that respiratory illnesses, including the new coronavirus, can spread by touching contaminated surfaces, particularly in places like day care centers, offices and hospitals. But a long chain of events has to happen for the disease to spread that way. The best way to protect yourself from coronavirus — whether it’s surface transmission or close human contact — is still social distancing, washing your hands, not touching your face and wearing masks.Common symptoms include fever, a dry cough, fatigue and difficulty breathing or shortness of breath. Some of these symptoms overlap with those of the flu, making detection difficult, but runny noses and stuffy sinuses are less common. The C.D.C. has also added chills, muscle pain, sore throat, headache and a new loss of the sense of taste or smell as symptoms to look out for. Most people fall ill five to seven days after exposure, but symptoms may appear in as few as two days or as many as 14 days.If air travel is unavoidable, there are some steps you can take to protect yourself. Most important: Wash your hands often, and stop touching your face. If possible, choose a window seat. A study from Emory University found that during flu season, the safest place to sit on a plane is by a window, as people sitting in window seats had less contact with potentially sick people. Disinfect hard surfaces. When you get to your seat and your hands are clean, use disinfecting wipes to clean the hard surfaces at your seat like the head and arm rest, the seatbelt buckle, the remote, screen, seat back pocket and the tray table. If the seat is hard and nonporous or leather or pleather, you can wipe that down, too. (Using wipes on upholstered seats could lead to a wet seat and spreading of germs rather than killing them.)More than 40 million people — the equivalent of 1 in 4 U.S. workers — have filed for unemployment benefits since the pandemic took hold. One in five who were working in February reported losing a job or being furloughed in March or the beginning of April, data from a Federal Reserve survey released on May 14 showed, and that pain was highly concentrated among low earners. Fully 39 percent of former workers living in a household earning $40,000 or less lost work, compared with 13 percent in those making more than $100,000, a Fed official said.There is an uptick in people reporting symptoms of chilblains, which are painful red or purple lesions that typically appear in the winter on fingers or toes. The lesions are emerging as yet another symptom of infection with the new coronavirus. Chilblains are caused by inflammation in small blood vessels in reaction to cold or damp conditions, but they are usually common in the coldest winter months. Federal health officials do not include toe lesions in the list of coronavirus symptoms, but some dermatologists are pushing for a change, saying so-called Covid toe should be sufficient grounds for testing.Yes, but make sure you keep six feet of distance between you and people who don’t live in your home. Even if you just hang out in a park, rather than go for a jog or a walk, getting some fresh air, and hopefully sunshine, is a good idea.Taking one’s temperature to look for signs of fever is not as easy as it sounds, as “normal” temperature numbers can vary, but generally, keep an eye out for a temperature of 100.5 degrees Fahrenheit or higher. If you don’t have a thermometer (they can be pricey these days), there are other ways to figure out if you have a fever, or are at risk of Covid-19 complications.The C.D.C. has recommended that all Americans wear cloth masks if they go out in public. This is a shift in federal guidance reflecting new concerns that the coronavirus is being spread by infected people who have no symptoms. Until now, the C.D.C., like the W.H.O., has advised that ordinary people don’t need to wear masks unless they are sick and coughing. Part of the reason was to preserve medical-grade masks for health care workers who desperately need them at a time when they are in continuously short supply. Masks don’t replace hand washing and social distancing.If you’ve been exposed to the coronavirus or think you have, and have a fever or symptoms like a cough or difficulty breathing, call a doctor. They should give you advice on whether you should be tested, how to get tested, and how to seek medical treatment without potentially infecting or exposing others.If you’re sick and you think you’ve been exposed to the new coronavirus, the C.D.C. recommends that you call your healthcare provider and explain your symptoms and fears. They will decide if you need to be tested. Keep in mind that there’s a chance — because of a lack of testing kits or because you’re asymptomatic, for instance — you won’t be able to get tested.Charity Navigator, which evaluates charities using a numbers-based system, has a running list of nonprofits working in communities affected by the outbreak. You can give blood through the American Red Cross, and World Central Kitchen has stepped in to distribute meals in major cities.Products marketed for children are fine for adults. The only real precaution, doctors told me, is to make sure you properly clean it between uses and among people — soapy water or sterilizing alcohol will usually do the trick.But for people like my friends, these are moot points. If we don’t have thermometers and aren’t ready to drop $50 on one, what else can we be doing?Don’t sweat the number. A specific temperature is only one of many indications of a fever. People will also have alternating chills and sweats, and body aches. And doctors don’t consider the precise number when deciding whether someone is ill.“Fever is a yes-no thing, and chills are a big thing,” Dr. Davidson told me.The childhood forehead test may be less precise than a digital reading, but it’s generally accurate in gauging sickness, he added. No wonder my mom relied on it to determine if her kids were well enough to go to school.Since talking to Dr. Davidson, my social isolation partner and I have designated each other as sole “forehead testers” for the duration of this period: an effective way to self-monitor and mitigate germ-spreading from either of us to the rest of the world.And if you are sick and seem to be registering a high body temperature? Call the doctor. If you’re really worried (or if, like me, you don’t have a primary care doctor), you may have to call the emergency room instead.That said, the severe shortage of coronavirus tests and medical supplies — a shortage many worry will soon include hospital beds themselves — means running a temperature or having a fever won’t get you into the hospital, even if you might have the coronavirus. It probably won’t even qualify you for diagnostic testing.To register that level of concern, doctors said, you need to experience trouble breathing so bad that you feel winded walking to the mailbox or even to the refrigerator.If that doesn’t happen, care for yourself at home. Self-isolate. Rest. Drink plenty of fluids, and take acetaminophen. (And my grain-of-salt advice: I swear by the healing powers — or at least comfort capacity — of Cocoa Puffs and Ritz crackers.)Otherwise, follow basic infection-control guidelines (which don’t necessarily involve rushing out to the drugstore as soon as a new stock of thermometers is delivered): Wash your hands frequently with soap, avoid touching your face. Put on your favorite isolation playlist, or some early-season “Gilmore Girls,” and practice your social distancing.Kaiser Health News (KHN) is a nonprofit news service covering health issues. It is an editorially independent program of the Kaiser Family Foundation that is not affiliated with Kaiser Permanente.Advertisement