https://www.nytimes.com/2020/05/13/business/economy/fed-chair-powell-economy-virus-support.html
Fed Chair Warns the Economy May Need More as Congress Hesitates - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
324
AdvertisementSupported byJerome H. Powell pointed to potentially dire consequences if a lasting economic downturn is not averted with forceful policies.transcriptThe scope and speed of this downturn are without modern precedent, significantly worse than any recession since World War II. We are seeing a severe decline in economic activity and employment, and already the job gains of the last decade have been erased. Governments around the world have responded quickly with measures to support workers who have lost income and businesses that have either closed or seen a sharp drop in activity. The response here in the United States has been particularly swift and forceful. To date, Congress has provided roughly $2.9 trillion in support for households, businesses, health care providers and state and local governments — about 14 percent of G.D.P. While the coronavirus economic shock appears to be the largest on record, the fiscal response has also been the fastest and largest response for any post-war downturn. But the coronavirus crisis raises longer-term concerns as well. The record shows that deeper and longer recessions can leave behind lasting damage to the productive capacity of the economy. Avoidable household and business insolvencies can weigh on growth for years to come, long stretches of unemployment can damage or end workers’ careers as their skills lose value and professional networks dry up, and leave families in greater debt. The loss of thousands of small- and medium-sized businesses across the country would destroy their life’s work and family legacy of many businesses and community leaders and limit the strength of the recovery when it comes. These businesses are a principal source of job creation, something we will need sorely as people seek to return to work.By Jeanna Smialek, Jim Tankersley and Emily CochraneThe Federal Reserve chair, Jerome H. Powell, delivered a stark warning on Wednesday that the United States was experiencing an economic hit “without modern precedent,” one that could permanently damage the economy if Congress and the White House did not provide sufficient financial support to prevent a wave of bankruptcies and prolonged joblessness.Mr. Powell’s blunt diagnosis was the latest indication that the trillions of dollars that policymakers have already funneled into the economy may not be enough to forestall lasting damage from a virus that has already shuttered businesses and thrown more than 20 million people out of work.Yet the warning comes as discussions of additional rescue measures have run aground, with Democrats proposing sweeping new programs and Republicans voicing concerns over the swelling federal budget deficit, which is projected to hit $3.7 trillion this year. President Trump and his economic advisers have pressed the pause button on negotiations for additional spending, waiting to see how much the economy rebounds as states begin lifting restrictions on business activity.Mr. Powell lauded Congress for the more than $2 trillion relief effort it had already funded, but he made clear that a rebound could take months to materialize, requiring more support.“The recovery may take some time to gather momentum,” Mr. Powell said at a Peterson Institute for International Economics virtual event. “Additional fiscal support could be costly, but worth it if it helps avoid long-term economic damage and leaves us with a stronger recovery.”Stock markets swooned after Mr. Powell’s comments, as investors digested the likelihood of a sluggish recovery. The S&P 500 index closed down 1.75 percent.As the virus persists and the number of unemployed grows, Mr. Powell and his central bank colleagues have begun trying to prod Congress and the White House into action by reminding them that the Fed alone cannot carry the burden of digging the economy out of its deep hole.Fed officials have slashed interest rates to zero, purchased bonds at a record pace to restore order to roiled government bond markets and unveiled nine emergency lending programs in partnership with the Treasury Department. But Mr. Powell reiterated on Wednesday that the Fed’s programs, which will buy bonds from companies and local governments and make loans to midsize businesses, can only temporarily supply credit. The Fed lacks spending powers, which are reserved to Congress.Mr. Powell characterized the Fed’s ability to help as a “bridge across temporary interruptions,” while suggesting that more may be needed as huge uncertainties confront the economy, from the speed of reopening to the scope of testing and the timing of a vaccine.“There is a sense, a growing sense I think, that the recovery will come more slowly than we would like,” he said, after highlighting that “the scope and speed of this downturn are without modern precedent, significantly worse than any recession since World War II.”Fed officials have increasingly cautioned that the recovery remains highly uncertain and that if the policy response proves inadequate, the consequences could be long-lasting and painful, particularly for the most disadvantaged.Loretta Mester, the president of the Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland, has urged more fiscal help to fend off “dire” economic scenarios. Robert S. Kaplan, the Dallas Fed president, said on Tuesday that the economy “may well” need more government help if the unemployment rate continues to rise, and Neel Kashkari, the president of the Minneapolis Fed, has said the fallout could last for years and displaced workers will probably need more aid to make it through.Coronavirus lockdowns have left tens of millions unemployed, disproportionately hitting service sector workers, many of them low income and without savings. Mr. Powell said a Fed survey set for release on Thursday would show that almost 40 percent of people who were working in February and were members of households making less than $40,000 a year had lost their jobs in March.“While the economic response has been both timely and appropriately large, it may not be the final chapter, given that the path ahead is both highly uncertain and subject to significant downside risks,” Mr. Powell said.“Since the answers are currently unknowable, policies will need to be ready to address a range of possible outcomes.”Whether Mr. Powell can push lawmakers into action remains to be seen. The Fed chair has cultivated solid relationships with key congressional Republicans and has a history of influencing economic thinking on Capitol Hill. Yet many Republicans, urged on by Mr. Trump, have begun trying to shift the conversation from federal spending support toward efforts to help the economy rebound as quickly as possible. They have largely stopped conveying the sense of urgency that Mr. Powell voiced on Wednesday.“I’m not sure I agree with that,” Senator Patrick J. Toomey, Republican of Pennsylvania, said when asked about Mr. Powell’s remarks. “Not sure that pumping more money out of Washington is going to do more good than harm at this point. I think we have to think that through very carefully.”On Tuesday, House Democrats released a multitrillion-dollar, 1,800-page proposal that includes hundreds of billions of dollars for state and local governments to shore up holes in their budgets and additional direct payments and tax credits for low- and middle-income Americans. But the proposal also contains a wide range of provisions that Republicans dismissed immediately as not directly linked to those struggling amid the pandemic, including bailouts for troubled pension plans and lifting a cap on state and local tax deductions.transcriptFrom The New York Times, I’m Michael Barbaro. This is “The Daily.”Today: Saving the U.S. economy from the fallout of the pandemic may require a historic infusion of cash. Ben Castleman on the debate over that spending.Its Monday, May 18.Ben, we’re talking to you on Friday morning, and a bunch of big, ugly, economic numbers just came out this morning. So we wanted to sift through them with you.Yeah. It’s been a pretty dark morning for the economy.Where do you think we should start?Maybe the place to start is actually on Thursday.We turn now to the economy. Nearly 3 million more Americans filed for unemployment benefits last week.When we learned that another 3 million Americans had filed for unemployment benefits.That’s more than 36 million people in two months.We’re two months into this crisis, and yet we are still losing millions of jobs every week.For eight straight weeks now, jobless claims have been in the millions with 3 million more people filing for unemployment last week.Right. Every week.Every week.This did not happen naturally. All of these companies didn’t just go out of business because demand disappeared. We turned our economy off. Right? Think about New York. Think about the state of California. If you ran a restaurant, a mini golf course, or a clothing store, there’s a really good chance you would have laid your workers off.And then, Friday morning, we get up.It’s the services industries that are getting crushed here.And we learn that retail sales in April were down more than 16 percent. That’s by far the worst that we’ve ever seen.But as far as these retail sales go, worse than expected month over month.Over the last two months, restaurants lost half their business. Apparel and clothing stores have lost nearly 90 percent of their business.The country’s shut down, and people aren’t buying stuff. I hate to state the obvious, but they’re not buying cars, down 12 percent. They’re not buying furnishings and home furnishing items, down 58 percent. Clothing and clothing accessories, down 78 percent.And then we got another data point that said that industrial production, right, this is the actual stuff that we make in the economy, was down by the most in more than a century that we’ve been keeping records, meaning worse than the Great Depression.In other words, as bad as it gets.As bad as it has ever gotten.We know that this is deep. We know that it is broad-based. We don’t yet know how long it will last. And that’s the fundamental question going forward.So given all that, I want to turn to a speech.Good morning. It’s my pleasure and privilege to welcome back Chair Jay Powell.That the chairman of the Federal Reserve, Jerome Powell, made a couple of days ago, that I think speaks to all this data.Yeah.And of course, the chairman of the Federal Reserve doesn’t make a ton of speeches, so I know that his words carry a lot of weight.Yeah. So Jerome Powell comes out.The coronavirus has left a devastating human and economic toll in its wake.Of course, he’s giving the speech remotely, so he’s in front of these blue curtains — or maybe they’re digitally superimposed blue curtains, I’m not actually sure — on a Zoom-style call. But he comes out with this really stark message.The scope and speed of this downturn are without modern precedent.And he’s saying, this economic crisis is incredibly deep.We are seeing a severe decline in economic activity and employment.It’s incredibly broad.And already, the job gains of the last decade have been erased.And it is hitting the most vulnerable workers more than anyone. He has this line early in the speech where he says —While we’re all affected.“While we are all affected” —The burden has fallen most heavily on those least able to bear it.— “The burden has fallen most heavily on those least able to bear it.”Among people who were working in February, almost 40 percent of those in households making less than $40,000 a year, had lost a job in March.Lower income Americans, black Americans, less educated Americans.But the coronavirus crisis raises longer term concerns as well. The record shows that deeper and longer recessions can leave behind lasting damage to the productive capacity of the economy.And Ben Powell talks about this specter of permanent economic damage in this speech, and perhaps he was referring most urgently to these lower income workers. But I want to understand that concept, because it feels a little bit new to me. I think of almost all economic conditions as temporary. So what did he mean by that?You’re right to think about most economic conditions as temporary, because historically, that is the way economists have thought about recessions and economic downturns — is some people lose their jobs, and then they get those jobs back when things get better. Some businesses lose business, or maybe they go out of business, but other things come back up and replace them. But we’ve learned over time that that is not the way recessions always work, and especially long and deep recessions. That when people lose their jobs, if they’re out of work for too long, they can drift away from the labor market. They can lose their connections, and all of a sudden, even when the economy starts to get better, it’s very hard for them to get back to work.I wonder if you can give me an example of this to bring it to life.Well, imagine a small company, right, that maybe somebody has spent their lives, maybe a couple generations building. You could imagine if this crisis were to last a few weeks, they lose some revenue, they take a hit, but they start right back up where they left off. But as this drags on and they fall behind on loans, you fall behind on your rent payments, and all of a sudden, you can get to a place where you can’t reopen that business, where you can’t restart. And sure, the business owner might be able to go and find another job, but that business is lost forever.And so that is what Powell is referring to when he talks about permanent economic damage from this pandemic.That’s what Powell fears, and that’s what he wants to make sure we avoid.What kind of solution, what kind of plan does he have in mind in this speech to avoid permanent economic damage?Well, Powell starts by talking about all the things that we have already done, and he’s full of praise for that.The response here in the United States has been particularly swift and forceful.He talks about what the Fed itself has done, of course, but he also talks about —To date, Congress has provided roughly $2.9 trillion.— what Congress has done, the nearly $3 trillion in emergency spending that Congress has approved.For households, businesses, health care providers and state and local governments.And there are a lot of programs that Congress has enacted to try to deal with this, right? They’ve written checks to virtually every American. They’ve offered loans and grants to businesses, and Powell says that all of those things have been incredibly important to softening the blow of this crisis.The overall policy response to date has provided a measure of relief and stability and will provide some support to the recovery, when it comes.But then, he says —But the coronavirus crisis raises longer term concerns as well.— basically, we’re not done yet.That that was not enough.That it probably won’t be enough. That we know now that this is not a crisis that is going to last for just a month or just a couple of months. It’s going to drag on. And that as it drags on, if the government doesn’t step in and do enough to keep people and businesses afloat, then we’re going to see a lot more of that kind of permanent damage that Powell is talking about.And when he suggests that we aren’t done yet, what is he really saying?What he’s really saying is to Congress, you need to keep spending. The Fed will do what it can do, but the Fed can only lend money. It’s Congress that has the ability to spend money, to give money to people, to give money to businesses. And that is, in all likelihood, what it will take to get through this period. He describes what’s been done so far as a bridge, a bridge across temporary interruptions, he says. And what he’s basically saying is the bridge doesn’t yet reach all the way across the river. And a bridge doesn’t do you much good if it stops when you’re still over water.No. It does not. Is that normal for the chairman of the Fed to do this, to be advising Congress to spend a lot more money in this manner?Not in as direct terms as this. But this was, at least by the standards of Fed chairs, a pretty direct call to action.Additional fiscal support could be costly but worth it, if it helps avoid long term damage and leaves us with a stronger recovery. This trade-off is one for our elected representatives who wield powers of taxation and spending.And can we safely assume that when the chairman of the Federal Reserve tells Congress, this is what I think you should do, that he assumes that that is what Congress will do?Oh, I don’t think we should assume that Powell thinks that Congress will do it. But I think Powell knew that he was speaking at a moment when there’s a major political debate that’s playing out between Democrats and Republicans about what the role of government is in this crisis. And he’s, in effect, weighing in on one side of that debate, but I don’t think he’s under any illusion that he alone will resolve it.We’ll be right back.So Ben, describe the divisions between Democrats and Republicans in Congress about this advice from Jerome Powell, the chairman of the Federal Reserve.Well, think back for a moment to those trillions of dollars in spending that have already taken place.I want to highlight a few areas of bipartisan economic relief we will be voting on today. Recovery checks to give Americans needed cash to provide for their families.When Congress approved those measures, it was really bipartisan.Right.This is a strange and evil disease. There is much we still don’t know about it, and it is keeping us apart.But that came at a moment when the economy was in the process of shutting down, and there was pretty widespread agreement that that had to happen.When we passed this bill, instead of hugging each other, we’ll wave from a distance. None of us can know when this plague will pass. The only thing we know for sure is that we must summon the same spirit that saw previous generations through America’s darkest hours.We’re now in a very different moment.Democratic leader.Well, it’s been two weeks since Leader McConnell called us back into session.Where there are real divisions between Republicans and Democrats about how quickly reopening should take place.In that time, it was announced that 30 million Americans filed for unemployment. And yet the Republican leader has scheduled exactly zero votes, zero, on legislation related to the coronavirus crisis.And with that comes real disagreement about the role of the federal government in continuing to support businesses and especially workers.Let’s solve the problem right now. What are we going to do for people who are out of work?The Democrats are by and large saying, much of the country is still shut down.What are we going to do for businesses that are going under?And so the government has to continue to support workers and businesses. It has to keep on spending. The Republican side is a little more complicated.This emergency is very serious. So the Senate’s response has been serious.It’s not unanimous, but there is certainly, at least in Congress, more of an inclination to say —Look, here in the real world, Senate Republicans are working seriously to help the country reopen.Let’s see how this reopening process goes. Let’s see if the businesses reopen, and if they do, maybe we don’t need to do very much more. And if they don’t come back and there’s a need for further action, then we can talk about that then.So it’s a bit more of a wait and see whether Congress really needs to spend all that much more money.That’s right, and that question of spending is what’s hanging over this. The Republicans are looking at the trillions, with a T, that have been spent so far and saying, can we wait to spend more?The crushing unemployment figures show us that no amount of federal spending could substitute for the entirety of the U.S. economy. We need to be smart, and we need to be safe, but we have to find a more sustainable middle ground.Ben, how tied are these different approaches to the long-standing economic ideologies of the Democratic and Republican parties?Well, look, Republicans have a long-standing discomfort with programs like unemployment insurance.At a certain point, these benefits are going to do more harm than good, and I would say they already are starting to do that. So extending unemployment benefits through next year would deter people from trying to return to work, because why would they? Why would someone choose to do more work for less money?So it’s not surprising that as we move from the acute phase of this crisis into the long, slow recovery, that Republicans would be the first to start raising questions about the spending and to start thinking about pulling back on some of those programs.So we’re already looking at staggering debt that we are going to have to deal with at some point, because it’s immoral to expect our kids and grandkids to pay that money back after we’ve already cashed those checks.Democrats have long advocated for more generous unemployment benefits, for a larger role for government, and so it’s not too surprising that they are more comfortable with these programs lasting longer.We need to show that we have a government that understands the scale of this problem and understands that the approach to it is to get money down into the hands of the people who will put it down at the grassroots level and help support this economy from the ground up.And so this is the long-standing, very inflexible ideological terrain that Powell is entering when he goes to Congress and says, hey, cough up trillions of dollars more.That’s right.But it feels like in this debate, the real anxiety is over just the enormity of the scale of money that we’re talking about. And I feel at this point, I have to ask you the question that we all pretend to know the answer to, which is: Where does all this money come from that Powell is suggesting Congress spend and that Democrats and Republicans are not really agreeing on whether to spend?In the simplest terms, we’re borrowing it. The congressional budget office projects that the deficit this year will be $3.7 trillion.And we’re borrowing those trillions of dollars from whom?So Congress decides how much it’s going to spend, and it of course sets tax rates as well. And any time that Congress decides to spend more than it brings in in tax rates, then the Treasury Department has to sell bonds to make up the difference. And that just means that it’s asking people, investors, foreign governments to lend the United States money. You give us money now, we’ll give you money back with a small amount of interest in anywhere from a few days to 10 years.Right. So when we hear about treasury bonds and their yields, that is the interest payment that the U.S. government is giving to someone who buys a treasury bond, and then the process has lent money to the U.S. and to Congress.That’s right. Every time the government sells a bond, it’s borrowing money from the public. It’s paying some interest on that, just like if you borrowed money to buy a house or to make a purchase, to buy a car. The only difference is the federal government gets a much better interest rate than you or I ever will.So we kind of become the bank.We become the bank.And to hear someone like Jerome Powell describe it, that doesn’t seem all that risky for Congress to spend all that money, which would require the U.S. borrowing that much from us and anyone who wants to buy U.S. treasury bonds. But is it risky?So in the short term, there’s really no risk here. We can keep borrowing, as long as people will keep lending us money. In the long term, of course, we have to make good on those loans.Right.And we have to pay interest on those loans. And so there will certainly be a debate when we come out the other side of this crisis about what the government should do about these huge deficits. But that debate is still years away. Because we’re at a very particular moment right now, which is that we’re in the middle of an immediate crisis. And if we don’t get our economy back on track, then none of that longer run debate matters. That debate is conditional on having an economy at all on the other side of this.Right. So you could have an economy with little debt, but you might not have much of an economy at all.Yeah. Powell is saying, the debt is the least of our worries right now. It’s not that it doesn’t matter. It’s not that it will never matter. But we have to try to get the economy through this period and moving again, before we can worry about any of those other long-run concerns. You could think about it like performing CPR. Right? Performing CPR often involves breaking ribs, and that’s a real consequence. But that doesn’t mean you don’t perform CPR. You perform CPR, you try to get somebody whose heart started again, and then you worry about the other consequences once the person’s heart is beating again.And just to be clear, in this metaphor the broken ribs is massive U.S. debt spending on stimulus.And the heart is the American economy, which right now is stopped and which we somehow have to get beating again. And so what you now have is Powell and lots of other economists who, like him, would normally be worried about the debt who are saying, now is not the moment. That includes people who were advisers to George W. Bush, people who were advisers to Republican candidates and Republican leaders throughout the last several decades. Pretty much all of the economists that I talk to and that my colleagues have been talking to are saying the same thing, which is now is not the moment to worry about the debt.So if this is the broad consensus of economists across the United States, Ben, why is this much of a debate in Congress at all?Economists like to think that they issue these sage pieces of advice, and everybody on Capitol Hill and in statehouses will rush to follow them. But of course, that’s not the way the world works.And so it may well be the case that many members of Congress thank the Federal Reserve chairman but say, you know, we’re not going to follow that advice.And we’ve already heard Republicans in Congress saying exactly that.Look, we can’t spend enough money to prop this economy up forever. People need to be able to begin to be productive again, consistent with the guidelines that have been laid down by the health care professionals toward opening up the economy. It’s the only solution to the dilemma with which we are confronted.They just don’t believe that what Powell is saying right now is the real solution to our economic problems, even though many of their own economic advisers are telling them the same thing.Ben, thank you very much.Thanks for having me.We’ll be right back.Here’s what else you need to know today.[CHEERING] Congratulations. You did it. We’re so proud of you, Davie.Thousands of high school and college seniors across the country —Yeah. Congratulations. Good job.celebrated their graduation over the weekend in virtual ceremonies.Happy graduation, Madison. We all love you! Love you!And were toasted in commencement speeches by everyone from Oprah Winfrey to Tom Hanks.You are the chosen ones. You are the chosen ones because of the fate unimagined when you began your Wright State adventures. You started in the olden times, in the world back before the great pandemic of 2020. You will talk of those earlier years in your lives just that way. Well, that was back before the Covid-19.In his commencement speeches, former President Barack Obama delivered pointed criticism of how the U.S. government has handled the pandemic.More than anything, this pandemic has fully finally torn back the curtain on the idea that so many of the folks in charge know what they’re doing. A lot of them aren’t even pretending to be in charge.Obama did not mention President Trump by name, but his remarks were seen as a clear indictment of his successor.All those adults that used to think they were in charge and knew what they were doing, turns out, they don’t have all the answers. A lot of them aren’t even asking the right questions. So if the world’s going to get better, it’s going to be up to you.That’s it for “The Daily.” I’m Michael Barbaro. See you tomorrow.Republicans are working on their own proposals that Democrats have similarly said should be off the table, including shielding businesses from virus-related legal liabilities. Lawmakers and the White House have also begun pushing for additional individual and business tax cuts.Senator Kevin Cramer, Republican of North Dakota, did not seem spurred to action by Mr. Powell’s warnings, noting that “it’s one person’s voice — a smart person, that I tend to agree with a lot — but it is just one person.”“I think we have to be very targeted about the next few weeks,” he said.Senator Marco Rubio, Republican of Florida, expressed some openness to more financial relief, provided that the spending was temporary and dealt with the pandemic as opposed to creating new permanent programs that would balloon the deficit.“I’m not insensitive to the debt issue nor do I believe we can government-spend our way out of this forever. Government cannot replace the private economy,” he said, adding that “at some point, we need economic activity to come back.”Early indications suggest that activity is only returning slowly to states that have moved to reopen businesses, as many would-be consumers and workers continue to stay home out of fear of contracting the virus. Total hours worked by employees of small businesses that use the human resource firm Homebase remain down by a third from pre-crisis levels in South Carolina and by two-fifths in Texas and Georgia, even after governors eased many restrictions in those states.With little evidence that Republicans and Democrats are willing to work together to continue helping businesses through a protracted slump, there is growing concern that the trillions already spent may have been too limited.Updated May 28, 2020States are reopening bit by bit. This means that more public spaces are available for use and more and more businesses are being allowed to open again. The federal government is largely leaving the decision up to states, and some state leaders are leaving the decision up to local authorities. Even if you aren’t being told to stay at home, it’s still a good idea to limit trips outside and your interaction with other people.Touching contaminated objects and then infecting ourselves with the germs is not typically how the virus spreads. But it can happen. A number of studies of flu, rhinovirus, coronavirus and other microbes have shown that respiratory illnesses, including the new coronavirus, can spread by touching contaminated surfaces, particularly in places like day care centers, offices and hospitals. But a long chain of events has to happen for the disease to spread that way. The best way to protect yourself from coronavirus — whether it’s surface transmission or close human contact — is still social distancing, washing your hands, not touching your face and wearing masks.Common symptoms include fever, a dry cough, fatigue and difficulty breathing or shortness of breath. Some of these symptoms overlap with those of the flu, making detection difficult, but runny noses and stuffy sinuses are less common. The C.D.C. has also added chills, muscle pain, sore throat, headache and a new loss of the sense of taste or smell as symptoms to look out for. Most people fall ill five to seven days after exposure, but symptoms may appear in as few as two days or as many as 14 days.If air travel is unavoidable, there are some steps you can take to protect yourself. Most important: Wash your hands often, and stop touching your face. If possible, choose a window seat. A study from Emory University found that during flu season, the safest place to sit on a plane is by a window, as people sitting in window seats had less contact with potentially sick people. Disinfect hard surfaces. When you get to your seat and your hands are clean, use disinfecting wipes to clean the hard surfaces at your seat like the head and arm rest, the seatbelt buckle, the remote, screen, seat back pocket and the tray table. If the seat is hard and nonporous or leather or pleather, you can wipe that down, too. (Using wipes on upholstered seats could lead to a wet seat and spreading of germs rather than killing them.)More than 40 million people — the equivalent of 1 in 4 U.S. workers — have filed for unemployment benefits since the pandemic took hold. One in five who were working in February reported losing a job or being furloughed in March or the beginning of April, data from a Federal Reserve survey released on May 14 showed, and that pain was highly concentrated among low earners. Fully 39 percent of former workers living in a household earning $40,000 or less lost work, compared with 13 percent in those making more than $100,000, a Fed official said.There is an uptick in people reporting symptoms of chilblains, which are painful red or purple lesions that typically appear in the winter on fingers or toes. The lesions are emerging as yet another symptom of infection with the new coronavirus. Chilblains are caused by inflammation in small blood vessels in reaction to cold or damp conditions, but they are usually common in the coldest winter months. Federal health officials do not include toe lesions in the list of coronavirus symptoms, but some dermatologists are pushing for a change, saying so-called Covid toe should be sufficient grounds for testing.Yes, but make sure you keep six feet of distance between you and people who don’t live in your home. Even if you just hang out in a park, rather than go for a jog or a walk, getting some fresh air, and hopefully sunshine, is a good idea.Taking one’s temperature to look for signs of fever is not as easy as it sounds, as “normal” temperature numbers can vary, but generally, keep an eye out for a temperature of 100.5 degrees Fahrenheit or higher. If you don’t have a thermometer (they can be pricey these days), there are other ways to figure out if you have a fever, or are at risk of Covid-19 complications.The C.D.C. has recommended that all Americans wear cloth masks if they go out in public. This is a shift in federal guidance reflecting new concerns that the coronavirus is being spread by infected people who have no symptoms. Until now, the C.D.C., like the W.H.O., has advised that ordinary people don’t need to wear masks unless they are sick and coughing. Part of the reason was to preserve medical-grade masks for health care workers who desperately need them at a time when they are in continuously short supply. Masks don’t replace hand washing and social distancing.If you’ve been exposed to the coronavirus or think you have, and have a fever or symptoms like a cough or difficulty breathing, call a doctor. They should give you advice on whether you should be tested, how to get tested, and how to seek medical treatment without potentially infecting or exposing others.If you’re sick and you think you’ve been exposed to the new coronavirus, the C.D.C. recommends that you call your healthcare provider and explain your symptoms and fears. They will decide if you need to be tested. Keep in mind that there’s a chance — because of a lack of testing kits or because you’re asymptomatic, for instance — you won’t be able to get tested.Charity Navigator, which evaluates charities using a numbers-based system, has a running list of nonprofits working in communities affected by the outbreak. You can give blood through the American Red Cross, and World Central Kitchen has stepped in to distribute meals in major cities.The economic stimulus payments that many Americans received remain, at least for now, a one-time payout. Expanded aid to the unemployed is set to expire at the end of July.The government’s main vehicle for helping small businesses — the Paycheck Protection Program — has nearly exhausted its $660 billion in funds, and many companies are beginning to worry that the loans, which cover just eight weeks of payroll, will not be enough as the virus persists.Economists and business advocates say now is not the time to abandon efforts that could determine whether a company comes through the crisis bruised but alive or is forced into bankruptcy.“They have yet to solve for the fundamental problem,” said John Lettieri, the president of the Economic Innovation Group, a Washington think tank that has pushed Congress and the Trump administration to spend more on the payroll program and loosen restrictions. “The program as implemented simply doesn’t do enough to help deeply affected businesses survive the crisis.”If the current recession is drawn out, Mr. Powell said, it could inflict “lasting damage” on the economy’s productive capacity, with “avoidable” business insolvencies weighing on growth for years to come. He also cautioned that long stretches of unemployment could erode worker skills and leave families struggling with huge debt loads.“We ought to do what we can to avoid these outcomes, and that may require additional policy measures,” Mr. Powell said.While congressional Republicans are worried that the packages will significantly add to the federal deficit, Mr. Powell said this was not the moment to fret over government spending.“Now, when we are facing the biggest shock that the economy has had in modern times, is, for me, not the time to prioritize considerations like that,” he said. That time will come “a few years down the road, when the economy is well and truly recovered, or at least mostly recovering.”Mr. Trump, who has been consistently critical of Mr. Powell and accused him of putting the United States at a disadvantage by keeping interest rates too high, said on Wednesday night that the Fed chair was the government’s “most improved player.”While noting that he still wanted the central bank to try out negative interest rates, Mr. Trump said Mr. Powell had been doing a “great job.” Mr. Powell on Wednesday ruled out lowering rates below zero, saying evidence about the effectiveness of negative interest rates had been “mixed.”Advertisement