https://www.nytimes.com/2020/03/20/well/we-wrote-you-a-hand-washing-song-listen-up.html
We Wrote You a Hand-Washing Song: Listen Up - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
286
AdvertisementSupported byThanks to coronavirus, the time has come for a new song to help us properly wash our hands.By Marc ShaimanIf you didn’t hate the Happy Birthday song already, you probably do now — it’s the song that we’ve all been told to sing twice as we wash our hands, to make sure we’ve done it long enough to be effective. Last week, it occurred to Susan Dominus, a reporter at The New York Times, that there should be an alternative, to spare the Happy Birthday song from so many unpleasant associations. This is when she called my co-lyricist, Scott Wittman, and me with a proposal: Maybe we could come up with an alternative? The new song would have to be fun — and, of course, last 20 seconds.Being self-isolated makes one happy to have a project — plus, it would feel good to write something that might put a happy spin on this situation we are in, even if for just a few momentsFor the occasion, Scott and I — we wrote the songs for “Hairspray” and “Mary Poppins Returns,” among others — created “Twenty Seconds,” which will hopefully turn you and your children into mini Danny Kayes. (Google Danny Kaye right now, I’ll wait…).We sent the song to some Broadway friends to help perform our new hand washing anthem. And they have channeled their energy into these homemade videos.The first is Jake Ryan Flynn from “Charlie and the Chocolate Factory” and “Mrs. Doubtfire:” transcriptSinging: Twenty seconds isn’t long. Barely time to sing this song. There’s no time to get it wrong. Not in 20 seconds. All that’s left is 14 secs to try to do what I must next. I can’t talk, please send a text! I’ve only 20 seconds — 20 seconds, now is 5, so kick it into overdrive! Ain’t it great to know that I’ve washed my hands for 20 seconds!Then, we have Samantha Williams, formerly from “Dear Evan Hansen,” and the forthcoming revival of “Caroline, or Change:” transcriptSinging: Twenty seconds isn’t long. Barely time to sing this song. There’s no time to get it wrong. Not in 20 seconds. All that’s left is 14 secs to try to do what I must next. I can’t talk, please send a text! I’ve only 14 seconds — 20 seconds, now is 5, so kick it into overdrive! Ain’t it great to say that I’ve washed my hands for 20 seconds!For some extra fun, here is yours truly:transcriptSinging: Twenty seconds isn’t long. Barely time to sing this song. There’s no time to get it wrong. Not in 20 seconds. All that’s left is 14 secs to try to do what I must next. I can’t talk, please send a text! I’ve only 14 seconds — 20 seconds, now is 5, so kick it into overdrive! Ain’t it great to know that I’ve washed my hands for 20 seconds!But why stop at just one song? We created not one, but two songs. The second one, with a huge tip of the hat to Barbra Streisand and her lyricist Lan O’Kun, is called “Half a Minute Waltz.” Try wrapping your tongue around these new hand-washing lyrics set to Chopin’s greatest hit. We are happy to have Broadway’s Bryce Pinkham (best known for his Tony-nominated performance in “A Gentleman’s Guide to Love and Murder”), to show you how it’s done. Wait till you see his over-the-shoulder paper towel toss!transcriptSinging: Turn the water on and start your hands a rubbin’. Now it’s time to soap ’em up and start to scrubbin’. You must work it up into a lather. Even though I know that you would rather. Be outside where there is dirt for you to play. But now’s the time for you to send the dirt away. So both your hands should wash away your troubles. Let your fingers dance among the bubbles. Keep a steady pace and please try not to fidget. Clean your thumbs and don’t forget to scrub each digit. Now it’s time to concentrate upon your nails. For that is where the dirt can leave it’s secret trails. Now it’s finally time for turning off the faucet. Use a paper towel then in the trash you’ll toss it. To stay healthy this is what the world commands. Bravo to you! You washed your hands!So now, dear reader, since so many of you may have some time on your hands — which hand-washing challenge can you meet?We’ve provided the lyrics for “Twenty Seconds” and the “Half a Minute Waltz” below. And although a cappella is one way to go, we also offer piano tracks and sheet music in varying keys for all, so whether you’re a soprano, alto, tenor or baritone, you’ve no excuse!Updated May 28, 2020States are reopening bit by bit. This means that more public spaces are available for use and more and more businesses are being allowed to open again. The federal government is largely leaving the decision up to states, and some state leaders are leaving the decision up to local authorities. Even if you aren’t being told to stay at home, it’s still a good idea to limit trips outside and your interaction with other people.Touching contaminated objects and then infecting ourselves with the germs is not typically how the virus spreads. But it can happen. A number of studies of flu, rhinovirus, coronavirus and other microbes have shown that respiratory illnesses, including the new coronavirus, can spread by touching contaminated surfaces, particularly in places like day care centers, offices and hospitals. But a long chain of events has to happen for the disease to spread that way. The best way to protect yourself from coronavirus — whether it’s surface transmission or close human contact — is still social distancing, washing your hands, not touching your face and wearing masks.Common symptoms include fever, a dry cough, fatigue and difficulty breathing or shortness of breath. Some of these symptoms overlap with those of the flu, making detection difficult, but runny noses and stuffy sinuses are less common. The C.D.C. has also added chills, muscle pain, sore throat, headache and a new loss of the sense of taste or smell as symptoms to look out for. Most people fall ill five to seven days after exposure, but symptoms may appear in as few as two days or as many as 14 days.If air travel is unavoidable, there are some steps you can take to protect yourself. Most important: Wash your hands often, and stop touching your face. If possible, choose a window seat. A study from Emory University found that during flu season, the safest place to sit on a plane is by a window, as people sitting in window seats had less contact with potentially sick people. Disinfect hard surfaces. When you get to your seat and your hands are clean, use disinfecting wipes to clean the hard surfaces at your seat like the head and arm rest, the seatbelt buckle, the remote, screen, seat back pocket and the tray table. If the seat is hard and nonporous or leather or pleather, you can wipe that down, too. (Using wipes on upholstered seats could lead to a wet seat and spreading of germs rather than killing them.)More than 40 million people — the equivalent of 1 in 4 U.S. workers — have filed for unemployment benefits since the pandemic took hold. One in five who were working in February reported losing a job or being furloughed in March or the beginning of April, data from a Federal Reserve survey released on May 14 showed, and that pain was highly concentrated among low earners. Fully 39 percent of former workers living in a household earning $40,000 or less lost work, compared with 13 percent in those making more than $100,000, a Fed official said.There is an uptick in people reporting symptoms of chilblains, which are painful red or purple lesions that typically appear in the winter on fingers or toes. The lesions are emerging as yet another symptom of infection with the new coronavirus. Chilblains are caused by inflammation in small blood vessels in reaction to cold or damp conditions, but they are usually common in the coldest winter months. Federal health officials do not include toe lesions in the list of coronavirus symptoms, but some dermatologists are pushing for a change, saying so-called Covid toe should be sufficient grounds for testing.Yes, but make sure you keep six feet of distance between you and people who don’t live in your home. Even if you just hang out in a park, rather than go for a jog or a walk, getting some fresh air, and hopefully sunshine, is a good idea.Taking one’s temperature to look for signs of fever is not as easy as it sounds, as “normal” temperature numbers can vary, but generally, keep an eye out for a temperature of 100.5 degrees Fahrenheit or higher. If you don’t have a thermometer (they can be pricey these days), there are other ways to figure out if you have a fever, or are at risk of Covid-19 complications.The C.D.C. has recommended that all Americans wear cloth masks if they go out in public. This is a shift in federal guidance reflecting new concerns that the coronavirus is being spread by infected people who have no symptoms. Until now, the C.D.C., like the W.H.O., has advised that ordinary people don’t need to wear masks unless they are sick and coughing. Part of the reason was to preserve medical-grade masks for health care workers who desperately need them at a time when they are in continuously short supply. Masks don’t replace hand washing and social distancing.If you’ve been exposed to the coronavirus or think you have, and have a fever or symptoms like a cough or difficulty breathing, call a doctor. They should give you advice on whether you should be tested, how to get tested, and how to seek medical treatment without potentially infecting or exposing others.If you’re sick and you think you’ve been exposed to the new coronavirus, the C.D.C. recommends that you call your healthcare provider and explain your symptoms and fears. They will decide if you need to be tested. Keep in mind that there’s a chance — because of a lack of testing kits or because you’re asymptomatic, for instance — you won’t be able to get tested.Charity Navigator, which evaluates charities using a numbers-based system, has a running list of nonprofits working in communities affected by the outbreak. You can give blood through the American Red Cross, and World Central Kitchen has stepped in to distribute meals in major cities.Please make your own videos and post on Instagram at #20secondhandwash — extra points for perfect hand-washing form! At the very least, your hands will be clean.Spread the word (not the germs)! As for Happy Birthday — let’s save it for happier occasionsTwenty seconds isn’t long,Barely time to sing this song.There’s no time to get it wrong,Not in twenty seconds!All that’s left is fourteen secs,To try to do what I must next.I can’t talk, please send a text!I’ve only fourteen seconds. Twenty seconds, now is five,So kick it into overdrive! Ain’t it great to say that I’ve, Washed my hands for twenty seconds!Turn the water on and start your hands a rubbin’Now it’s time to soap ‘em up and start to scrubbin’You must work it up into a lather,Even though I know that you would rather, Be outside where there is dirt for you to play, But now’s the time for your to send the dirt away. So both your hands should wash away your troubles.Let your fingers dance among the bubbles. Keep a steady pace and please try not to fidget,Clean your thumbs and don’t forget to scrub each digit. Now it’s time to concentrate upon your nails,For that is where the dirt can leave its secret trails. Now it’s finally time for turning off the faucet. Use a paper towel, then in the trash you’ll toss it. To stay healthy this is what the world commands. Bravo to you! You washed your hands!Illustration by Super FreakAdvertisement