http://www.nytimes.com/2016/10/22/us/minneapolis-police-jamar-clark.html
Minneapolis Police Officers Will Not Be Disciplined for Fatal Shooting - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
114
AdvertisementSupported byBy The Associated PressMINNEAPOLIS — Two Minneapolis police officers followed proper procedure in a confrontation that led to the fatal shooting of a black man nearly a year ago and will not be disciplined, the police chief announced Friday.Chief Janée Harteau said an internal investigation found that the officers were warranted in using deadly force against the man, Jamar Clark, 24.Mr. Clark was shot in the head on Nov. 15 in a confrontation with the officers, Mark Ringgenberg and Dustin Schwarze, on the city’s north side. The death set off protests that lasted several weeks, including an 18-day encampment around the area’s police precinct.A local prosecutor and the United States attorney have declined to charge the officers, who are both white, in Mr. Clark’s death, citing conflicting testimony from witnesses.“These officers did not dictate the outcome of this incident,” Chief Harteau said. “I can say with absolute certainty that I support the actions of Officers Ringgenberg and Schwarze the night of Nov. 15.”Some witnesses told the police that Mr. Clark was handcuffed at the time of the shooting. But an investigation by the Minnesota Bureau of Criminal Apprehension found that the officers had tried and failed to cuff Mr. Clark, and he was shot in the ensuing confrontation after one of the officers shouted that Mr. Clark had his hand on the officer’s gun.Investigators said Officer Ringgenberg wrestled Mr. Clark to the ground but wound up on his back on top of him and felt Mr. Clark’s hand on his weapon. Officer Schwarze then shot Mr. Clark in an encounter that lasted barely a minute.A separate Justice Department inquiry is underway into the city’s response to the protests. Demonstrations were largely peaceful, but one on Nov. 18 included skirmishes between officers and protesters that have resulted in at least one federal lawsuit.Advertisement