https://www.nytimes.com/2020/05/30/us/george-floyd-minneapolis.html
George Floyd Protests: Live News and Updates - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
1
AdvertisementSupported byOfficials were preparing for a fifth night of protests in Minneapolis and said it could be the most explosive yet. Other protests were planned across the country on Saturday. Right NowAttorney General William P. Barr issued a stern warning to protesters, saying “groups of outside radicals” were exploiting the situation for their own agenda. Gov. Tim Walz of Minnesota activated thousands of additional National Guard troops to send to Minneapolis but declined the Army’s offer to deploy military police units, as days of protests over the death of George Floyd, a black man who died in police custody, threatened to boil over even further on Saturday. Mr. Walz, a Democrat, acknowledged that officials had underestimated the demonstrations in Minneapolis, where despite a newly issued curfew, people burned buildings and turned the city’s streets into a smoldering battleground on Friday night. He compared the havoc to wars that Americans have fought overseas, and said he expected even more unrest on Saturday night. “What you’ve seen in previous nights, I think, will be dwarfed by what they will do tonight,” he said.The protests surged even after the arrest of the officer who held his knee on Mr. Floyd’s neck for nearly nine minutes on Monday, leading to charges of third-degree murder and second-degree manslaughter by Friday. The national anger and sorrow fueled by a widely shared video of the encounter, left Minneapolis convulsing with fires and police confrontations and galvanized protests in cities across the country, including Los Angeles, New York, Atlanta and Washington, D.C. Protests in Louisville, Ky., also focused on the death of Breonna Taylor, a young black emergency medical technician shot dead when police officers burst through her apartment door in March. With further protests planned across the country on Saturday, President Trump urged officials in Minnesota to “get tougher” and offered the support of the military, the use of which would represent a significant escalation in the government’s response to the tensions. Pentagon officials said that Defense Secretary Mark Esper and General Mark Milley, the chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, spoke Friday with Mr. Walz, to express “willingness” to deploy military police units. The governor declined the offer, the officials said, and has since activated all of the state’s national guard troops, up to 13,200. Nonetheless, the U.S. Northern Command has put several military police units on four-hour status, which means they could be ready to deploy in four hours, as opposed to a day.State and federal officials have increasingly condemned the protests in Minneapolis and elsewhere, which have at times been peaceful and other times marked by fires, looting and vandalism. Commissioner John Harrington of the Minnesota Department of Public Safety said that there had been “tens of thousands” of people in the streets on Friday, more than any other night since Mr. Floyd’s death on Monday set off a wave of protests that have become increasingly destructive across the country.Minnesota officials said it appeared that some of the more violent protesters were from out of the state, and Attorney General William P. Barr on Saturday denounced radical “agitators” who he said had their own personal agendas. Mayor Jacob Frey of Minneapolis, looking weary after four days of outrage in his city, pleaded with residents to go home and stop burning down the local businesses that he said were even more vital in the middle of a pandemic.“You’re not getting back at the police officer that tragically killed George Floyd by looting a town,” Mr. Frey said. “You’re not getting back at anybody.”transcriptLet’s be very clear: The situation in Minneapolis is no longer in any way about the murder of George Floyd. It is about attacking civil society, instilling fear and disrupting our great cities. With that being the case, as we indicated last night, our tactics again, is to try and reduce loss of life. To do what we can to restore order. I spoke early this morning with the Secretary of Defense, Esper, and with the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, Milley, extensively to update on the situation, receive their situation report as they’re seeing it across the country, and to suggest courses of action. So in consultation as a group, and as we said this morning, I’m authorizing and talking to General Jensen to fully mobilize the Minnesota National Guard, an action that has never been taken in the 164-year history of the Minnesota National Guard. By this afternoon, our hope is to exponentially have that force out there, to use all other resources in the state and our partnerships of sister cities across there and counties to help us. It will be a dangerous situation on the streets tonight. We will do everything in our power to restore that order that Minnesotans expect, that Minnesotans demand.President Trump on Saturday criticized the authorities in Minnesota for allowing protests to turn violent, and offered the help of the military to contain further protests over the death of George Floyd, which escalated this week with the burning of a police station and other buildings in Minneapolis. “They have to get tougher, and by being tougher they will be honoring his memory,” Mr. Trump said on the South Lawn of the White House, adding: “When I saw the policemen running out of a police station for that police station to be abandoned and taken over, I’ve never seen anything so horrible and stupid in my life.””We have our military ready, willing and able if they ever want to call our military,” he said. “We could have troops on the ground very quickly.”His comments, paired with a series of tweets on Saturday, threatened to inflame an already tense situation that has played out in protests across the country and in front of the White House. In one tweet, he called demonstrators who gathered at the White House on Friday night “professionally managed so-called ‘protesters’” and suggested that his supporters would march outside the White House on Saturday.“Tonight, I understand, is MAGA NIGHT AT THE WHITE HOUSE???” he tweeted.Asked later whether the tweet might invited more racial violence, Mr. Trump demurred. “These are people that love our country,” he said of his supporters. “I have no idea if they were going to be here, I was just asking.”“By the way,” he added, “they love African-American people, they love black people.”Mr. Trump also praised the Secret Service’s response to the earlier White House protest in stark terms and criticized Mayor Muriel E. Bowser of Washington, saying the capital’s police didn’t do enough to contain the protests.His latest comments came after he injected himself into the national tension over race and police brutality on Friday with tweets that called the protesters in Minneapolis “thugs” and said: “When the looting starts, the shooting starts.” The comment echoed a phrase coined by a Miami police chief in the 1960s about crackdowns on black neighborhoods during times of unrest, and was quickly seized upon by his national critics. Twitter also labeled the tweet as violating its terms of service for “glorifying violence.” Mr. Trump later said he was unaware of the phrase’s history and walked back his comments, saying that he meant that “looting leads to shooting” and “I don’t want this to happen.” Attorney General William P. Barr, who has vowed for a swift federal investigation into Mr. Floyd’s death, also weighed in on Saturday, issuing a stern warning to left-wing “agitators” who he said were exploiting the protests to pursue their own goals. Mr. Barr, at a brief news conference, said outrage over the death of Mr. Floyd, 46, was “real and legitimate,” but said justice must be served through the courts, not through the rioting that has overtaken several of the nation’s largest cities. Mr. Barr warned that protesters who cross state lines to “incite or participate in violent rioting” may be violating federal laws and that the Justice Department would pursue cases against them.“The voices of peaceful protest are being hijacked by violent radical elements,” Mr. Barr said. “Groups of outside radicals are exploiting the situation to pursue their own separate and violent agenda.”The United States attorney in Minnesota is investigating the officer’s actions for possible violations of civil rights laws or other federal crimes.Rallies expanded far beyond Minneapolis on Friday, with protesters destroying police vehicles in Atlanta and New York, and blocking major streets in San Jose and Detroit. Crowds in Milwaukee chanted, “I can’t breathe” and demonstrators in Portland, Ore., lit a fire inside the Multnomah County Justice Center.Hundreds of demonstrators poured into the streets near Atlanta’s Centennial Olympic Park, smashing windows and clashing with police officers. Not far away, some people climbed atop a large red CNN sign outside the media company’s headquarters and spray-painted messages on it. Others shattered windows at the College Football Hall of Fame, where people rushed in and emerged with branded fan gear.“What are you changing by tearing up a city?” Mayor Keisha Lance Bottoms said in a news conference. “You’ve lost all credibility now. This is not how we change America. This is not how we change the world.”Protests in Los Angeles ended with more than 500 arrests. The L.A.P.D. released a statement saying that it was still assessing the property damage, and that “numerous downtown businesses” had been damaged and looted. The police in Houston arrested nearly 200 people who took part in what they said were “unlawful assemblies” throughout Friday and early Saturday morning. In a Twitter post, police officials said most of those arrested would be charged with obstructing a roadway. In scuffles, four officers received minor injuries, and eight police vehicles were damaged. In New York, thousands of people attended a demonstration at the perimeter of Barclays Center in Brooklyn. Some hurled bottles and debris at police officers, who responded with pepper spray.A burned police van was still smoking near Fort Greene Park after two Fire Department trucks pulled away. Protesters slammed its doors off their hinges, threw fireworks into the charred seats, flattened the tires and placed a sign down that read, “Black Lives Matter.”“I’m just really tired of sitting at home and just doing nothing, basically watching this happen,” said Jason Phillips, 27, of Queens, who was at an earlier protest in Manhattan. “I need to be a part of history. I need to be a part of the change.”More protests were expected on Saturday, and the city of Portland, Ore. imposed its own curfew for Saturday night. Protests broke out in cities across the country over the death of a black man in police custody in Minnesota and other recent killings of unarmed black people.SeattleWASH.ME.MINN.MONT.PortlandN.D.VT.N.H.MinneapolisBostonORE.WIS.N.Y.St. PaulIDAHOS.D.DetroitCALIF.New YorkWYO.ChicagoDes MoinesCONN.Fort WayneSacramentoPA.IOWAN.J.OmahaWashingtonILL.DenverOaklandMD.DEL.IndianapolisColumbusUTAHRichmondSan JoseW.VA.CincinnatiLouisvilleLas VegasCOLO.HamptonKAN.Kansas CityKY.MO.NorfolkBakersfieldN.C.AlbuquerqueTENN.ARIZ.CharlotteMemphisOKLA.LosAngelesS.C.N.M.AtlantaARK. PhoenixDallasALA.GA.MISS.TEX.LA.New OrleansHoustonFLA.ALASKAHAWAIISeattleWASH.PortlandME.MONT.N.D.MINN.VT.N.H.ORE.BostonMinneapolisMICH.WIS.N.Y.IDAHOSt. PaulS.D.DetroitMASS.New YorkWYO.ChicagoCONN.Des MoinesNEV.Fort WayneNEB.SacramentoPA.N.J.OHIOWashingtonIND.ILL.DenverOmahaMD.OaklandDEL.IndianapolisUTAHColumbusRichmondSan JoseKansas CityCOLO.W.VA.CincinnatiLouisvilleLas VegasHamptonVA.CALIF.KAN.KY.MO.NorfolkBakersfieldN.C.AlbuquerqueCharlotteTENN.ARIZ.LosAngelesMemphisOKLA.S.C.AtlantaN.M.ARK. PhoenixGA.DallasALA.MISS.TEX.LA.HoustonNew OrleansFLA.ALASKAHAWAIISeattleWASH.PortlandME.MONT.N.D.MINN.VT.N.H.ORE.BostonMinneapolisWIS.MICH.IDAHON.Y.S.D.St. PaulDetroitNew YorkMASS.WYO.ChicagoCONN.Des MoinesNEV.Fort WayneSacramentoPA.NEB.IOWAN.J.OHIOWashingtonIND.ILL.DenverMD.OmahaOaklandDEL.IndianapolisUTAHColumbusRichmondSan JoseW.VA.Kansas CityCOLO.CincinnatiLouisvilleLas VegasHamptonKAN.VA.CALIF.KY.MO.NorfolkBakersfieldAlbuquerqueN.C.CharlotteTENN.MemphisARIZ.OKLA.LosAngelesS.C.AtlantaN.M.ARK. PhoenixDallasGA.ALA.MISS.TEX.LA.HoustonNew OrleansFLA.ALASKAHAWAIIMinneapolis Protests continued even as the city was under a curfew Friday night.Houston Protesters marched through downtown, blocking interstate traffic.Washington A large crowd chanted outside the White House, prompting the Secret Service to lock down the building.Atlanta  Vehicles were set afire, and buildings vandalized. Police used tear gas to try to disperse protesters.By Jugal. K Patel, Jin Wu and Juliette LoveThe intensifying protests came after the authorities announced that the officer who pinned George Floyd to the ground had been arrested and charged with murder on Friday, a development that activists and Mr. Floyd’s family had called for but also said did not go far enough. The officer, Derek Chauvin, 44, was charged with third-degree murder and second-degree manslaughter, charges that come with a combined maximum sentence of 35 years.  An investigation into the three other officers who were present at the scene remains ongoing. Mr. Floyd’s relatives have said that had wanted the more serious charge of first-degree murder. Third-degree murder does not require an intent to kill, according to the Minnesota statute, only that the perpetrator caused someone’s death in a dangerous act “without regard for human life.” Charges of first- and second-degree murder require prosecutors to prove, in almost all cases, that the perpetrator made a decision to kill the victim.A lawyer for Mr. Chauvin’s wife, Kellie, said that she was devastated by Mr. Floyd’s death and expressed sympathy for his family and those grieving his loss. The case has also led Ms. Chauvin to seek a divorce, the lawyer, Amanda Mason-Sekula, said in an interview on Friday night. In the year before George Floyd and the police officer now charged with his death, Derek Chauvin, encountered each other on a Minneapolis street, they had worked at the same Latin nightclub. But it was the minutes leading up to Mr. Floyd’s death, as he was pinned on the ground, that the authorities are racing to understand.In a move that has since prompted protests in cities across the country, Mr. Chauvin knelt down on Mr. Floyd behind a police vehicle outside the store. For eight minutes and 46 seconds, according to a criminal complaint filed on Friday by the Hennepin County attorney, the police officer pressed his knee into Mr. Floyd’s neck in silence, staring toward the ground as his captive gasped repeatedly that he could not breathe.Bystanders waved their cellphones, cursed and pleaded for help, and still, for two minutes and 53 seconds after Mr. Floyd had stopped protesting and became unresponsive, the officer continued to kneel.The fatal encounter began just before 8 p.m. on Monday, when Mr. Floyd entered Cup Foods and a store clerk claimed that he had paid for cigarettes with a counterfeit $20 bill. In the minutes that followed, Mr. Floyd found himself on the ground, beneath the officer’s knee. He called, records say, for his mother. He said, “Please.”One of the officers dismissed his pleas that he could not breathe.“You are talking fine,” one officer said, according to the charging documents.At least one officer was worried: That officer asked if they should roll Mr. Floyd over on his side.“No, staying put where we got him,” Mr. Chauvin replied.At 8:24 p.m., Mr. Floyd stopped moving.Reporting was contributed by Tim Arango, Mike Baker, Julian E. Barnes, Nicholas Bogel-Burroughs, Audra D.S. Burch, Helene Cooper, Manny Fernandez, Thomas Fuller, Matt Furber, Maggie Haberman, Shawn Hubler, Neil MacFarquhar, Sarah Mervosh and Frances Robles.Advertisement