https://www.nytimes.com/2020/03/27/smarter-living/how-you-can-make-your-home-safer.html
How You Can Make Your Home Safer - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
226
AdvertisementSupported byNow that you are staying at home to protect yourself from spreading coronavirus, here’s what you need to do to protect your family as well.By Sanam YarAs cases of the coronavirus increase across the country, many states are advising people to stay at home as much as possible and abide by social distancing measures.Though mandates vary from state to state, millions of Americans are minimizing their exposure to other people and preventing the spread of the virus across communities by not leaving the house, other than for necessities like grocery shopping.So, now that you’re at home, what should you be doing to safeguard your residence against coronavirus? There are some simple practices you can follow to help reduce the risk of being exposed to or spreading the virus.The best advice is the simplest: Wash your hands frequently with soap and water for at least 20 seconds. Do it when you come in from outside, and before eating or preparing food. Hand sanitizer that contains a minimum of 60 percent alcohol also works. And whatever you do, don’t touch your face.While there’s no definitive answer for whether you should remove your shoes when you enter the house, it may be a good general public health practice to change into house slippers after walking outside, said Dr. Boris Lushniak, the dean of the School of Public Health at the University of Maryland. “This has nothing to do with Covid-19 — just with cleanliness in the house,” he said.The same reasoning applies to changing out of clothing you’ve worn outside once you’re indoors, he said. “If, for example, someone sneezes or coughs on you, then obviously change clothes,” he said. “My sense is, let’s just be wary of what we’re doing and what kind of contact we have.”Have a conversation with all members of your household (especially children) about regular hand-washing.If possible, try to plan for two weeks worth of meals and any other essentials to limit the number of trips needed for more supplies. If you’re able to, stock up on at least a 30-day supply of any necessary prescriptions as well.Pick a room — and a bathroom, if you have a spare — that a member of the household can use to undergo stricter quarantine in the event that they become sick or come into contact with someone who is ill. If someone in your home is a member of a population that is more at risk of developing severe side effects from coronavirus, including older people and those with underlying health conditions, try to create a “protected space” for their use. Even if you appear healthy, assume you’ve come into contact with the virus and wash your hands before interacting with them.If someone in your household begins coughing, sneezing or exhibiting other mild symptoms, Dr. Lushniak recommends giving that person space and putting them in isolation away from others. Designate a lined trash can for any sick house member’s use to help decrease the risk of infecting others. Wear gloves when handling trash, and make sure to wash your hands afterward.And sick or not sick, now is not the time to share things like cutlery, plates, towels and toothbrushes with other people in your household, said Dr. John Townes, the medical director of Infection Prevention and Control at Oregon Health and Science University.When it comes to cleaning the house, the C.D.C. recommends cleaning and disinfecting frequently touched surfaces daily. Be mindful of surfaces like doorknobs, phones, keyboards, light switches, toilet handles, countertops and remote controls that get frequently used. Wear disposable gloves while cleaning, if you have them.Some research suggests that the virus may be able to survive for up to three days on surfaces like plastic and steel. Though experts say the risk of infection from these materials is low, they recommend wiping down things like delivered packages with disinfectant wipes and washing your hands if you are worried.If you are using your car, don’t forget to disinfect the interior of your vehicle, like the steering wheel, as needed. “Be aware of who’s in your car, and clean afterward as necessary,” said Dr. Lushniak. He recommended keeping windows open while driving to avoid recirculated air among passengers.Make sure to clean dirty surfaces with soap and water or detergent. If you choose to use a household disinfectant, find one certified by the Environmental Protection Agency. Other options the C.D.C. recommends for disinfecting include solutions with at least 70 percent alcohol, as well as diluted bleach solutions.Closely following the instructions listed on household cleaners will ensure they’re effectively disinfecting the area, Dr. Townes said.But even if you have all the disinfectants in the world and regularly clean household surfaces, Dr. Lushniak stressed that above all else, washing your hands is still the most effective thing you can do to prevent the spread of this disease.Updated May 28, 2020States are reopening bit by bit. This means that more public spaces are available for use and more and more businesses are being allowed to open again. The federal government is largely leaving the decision up to states, and some state leaders are leaving the decision up to local authorities. Even if you aren’t being told to stay at home, it’s still a good idea to limit trips outside and your interaction with other people.Touching contaminated objects and then infecting ourselves with the germs is not typically how the virus spreads. But it can happen. A number of studies of flu, rhinovirus, coronavirus and other microbes have shown that respiratory illnesses, including the new coronavirus, can spread by touching contaminated surfaces, particularly in places like day care centers, offices and hospitals. But a long chain of events has to happen for the disease to spread that way. The best way to protect yourself from coronavirus — whether it’s surface transmission or close human contact — is still social distancing, washing your hands, not touching your face and wearing masks.Common symptoms include fever, a dry cough, fatigue and difficulty breathing or shortness of breath. Some of these symptoms overlap with those of the flu, making detection difficult, but runny noses and stuffy sinuses are less common. The C.D.C. has also added chills, muscle pain, sore throat, headache and a new loss of the sense of taste or smell as symptoms to look out for. Most people fall ill five to seven days after exposure, but symptoms may appear in as few as two days or as many as 14 days.If air travel is unavoidable, there are some steps you can take to protect yourself. Most important: Wash your hands often, and stop touching your face. If possible, choose a window seat. A study from Emory University found that during flu season, the safest place to sit on a plane is by a window, as people sitting in window seats had less contact with potentially sick people. Disinfect hard surfaces. When you get to your seat and your hands are clean, use disinfecting wipes to clean the hard surfaces at your seat like the head and arm rest, the seatbelt buckle, the remote, screen, seat back pocket and the tray table. If the seat is hard and nonporous or leather or pleather, you can wipe that down, too. (Using wipes on upholstered seats could lead to a wet seat and spreading of germs rather than killing them.)More than 40 million people — the equivalent of 1 in 4 U.S. workers — have filed for unemployment benefits since the pandemic took hold. One in five who were working in February reported losing a job or being furloughed in March or the beginning of April, data from a Federal Reserve survey released on May 14 showed, and that pain was highly concentrated among low earners. Fully 39 percent of former workers living in a household earning $40,000 or less lost work, compared with 13 percent in those making more than $100,000, a Fed official said.There is an uptick in people reporting symptoms of chilblains, which are painful red or purple lesions that typically appear in the winter on fingers or toes. The lesions are emerging as yet another symptom of infection with the new coronavirus. Chilblains are caused by inflammation in small blood vessels in reaction to cold or damp conditions, but they are usually common in the coldest winter months. Federal health officials do not include toe lesions in the list of coronavirus symptoms, but some dermatologists are pushing for a change, saying so-called Covid toe should be sufficient grounds for testing.Yes, but make sure you keep six feet of distance between you and people who don’t live in your home. Even if you just hang out in a park, rather than go for a jog or a walk, getting some fresh air, and hopefully sunshine, is a good idea.Taking one’s temperature to look for signs of fever is not as easy as it sounds, as “normal” temperature numbers can vary, but generally, keep an eye out for a temperature of 100.5 degrees Fahrenheit or higher. If you don’t have a thermometer (they can be pricey these days), there are other ways to figure out if you have a fever, or are at risk of Covid-19 complications.The C.D.C. has recommended that all Americans wear cloth masks if they go out in public. This is a shift in federal guidance reflecting new concerns that the coronavirus is being spread by infected people who have no symptoms. Until now, the C.D.C., like the W.H.O., has advised that ordinary people don’t need to wear masks unless they are sick and coughing. Part of the reason was to preserve medical-grade masks for health care workers who desperately need them at a time when they are in continuously short supply. Masks don’t replace hand washing and social distancing.If you’ve been exposed to the coronavirus or think you have, and have a fever or symptoms like a cough or difficulty breathing, call a doctor. They should give you advice on whether you should be tested, how to get tested, and how to seek medical treatment without potentially infecting or exposing others.If you’re sick and you think you’ve been exposed to the new coronavirus, the C.D.C. recommends that you call your healthcare provider and explain your symptoms and fears. They will decide if you need to be tested. Keep in mind that there’s a chance — because of a lack of testing kits or because you’re asymptomatic, for instance — you won’t be able to get tested.Charity Navigator, which evaluates charities using a numbers-based system, has a running list of nonprofits working in communities affected by the outbreak. You can give blood through the American Red Cross, and World Central Kitchen has stepped in to distribute meals in major cities.When doing laundry, use the warmest appropriate setting and dry items fully. If you have disposable gloves, wear them while doing laundry. If someone in your household is sick, it’s possibly safest to wash their clothes, towels and bedding separately. Be sure to clean and disinfect laundry hampers, too.If you do your laundry at a laundromat, avoid going when it is full. “You have to be really cognizant of social distancing,” Dr. Lushniak said. “If you’re going to a laundromat, you ultimately want to stay at least six feet away from others, and if you can’t, come back at another time when it’s less busy.”Touching several surfaces while doing laundry is inevitable, so avoid touching your face until you’ve used hand sanitizer or washed your hands.Remember all those times your mother told you to crack open your window and let in some fresh air? Turns out she was right. “Fresh air is great and we’re trying to avoid the idea of being in enclosed spaces with recirculated air,” Dr. Lushniak said. Open some windows!Practicing mental and physical fitness at home is also important. If you can, try doing an exercise routine at home, stretching or even doing something as simple as jumping jacks. Reading a book, meditating, playing a game or just otherwise giving yourself a break from the news is a good idea.So, to reiterate, stay calm, and practice the same tried-and-true basic health practices that have existed for “well over a century,” Dr. Lushniak said.“Wash your hands, use hygienic measures to cover a cough or sneeze, clean your surfaces, stay at home,” he said. “If you’re sick, stay away from others, and finally, take care of yourselves.”Advertisement