https://www.nytimes.com/2020/05/05/business/coronavirus-meat-shortages.html
A Wendy’s With No Burgers as Meat Production Is Hit - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
159
AdvertisementSupported byHundreds of the fast-food chain’s locations aren’t serving hamburgers and grocery stores are limiting meat purchases, as shoppers begin to feel the impact of meatpacking plant shutdowns.By David Yaffe-Bellany and Michael CorkeryHundreds of Wendy’s restaurants have run out of hamburgers. Kroger, the largest supermarket chain in the United States, is limiting the amount of ground beef and pork that customers can buy at some stores. And Costco, where shoppers typically buy in bulk, has placed a three-product cap on purchases of fresh beef, poultry and pork.Over the last month, dozens of meatpacking plants across the country have shut down because of coronavirus outbreaks, raising concerns about the country’s meat supply. Now, the impact of those disruptions is reaching customers at fast-food drive-throughs as well as grocery stores like Wegmans and Hy-Vee, where certain meat products are becoming harder to find.On Monday, nearly one-fifth of Wendy’s restaurants — a total of 1,043 locations — were completely sold out of beef products, including burgers, according to analysis by the financial firm Stephens, which examined the online menu at every Wendy’s in the United States.On social media, customers posted photographs of “sold out” signs at Wendy’s drive-throughs and noted the irony of a hamburger shortage at a chain that popularized the slogan “where’s the beef?”“It is widely known that beef suppliers across North America are currently facing production challenges,” a Wendy’s spokesman said in a statement on Tuesday. “Some of our menu items may be temporarily limited at some restaurants in this current environment.”The problems at Wendy’s are most likely only the beginning of fresh beef shortages that may reach their peak around Memorial Day, when many Americans will be firing up grills. (Analysts say there is no shortage of frozen beef in cold storage.)Last week was the fourth week in a row that the number of cattle slaughtered fell below 500,000, down more than 35 percent from average beef production, according to Cassandra Fish, a meat industry analyst.And while many grocery chains have not publicly acknowledged they are running low on meat, Ms. Fish said retailers were starting to experience stock shortages caused by the constrained supply, not simply because of hoarding by consumers.“It is shocking,” Ms. Fish said. “There is not one person in the meat industry who was not caught off guard.”Over the last few days, a series of grocery stores have announced limits on meat purchases. In addition to Costco and Kroger, Hy-Vee said on Tuesday that it would restrict customers to four packages of fresh beef, ground beef, pork and chicken.Stores are also anticipating that certain products may become more difficult to find. A Wegmans spokeswoman, Laura Camera, said on Tuesday that the chain “may not have every product cut or variety available for the next few weeks.”The impact on the fast-food industry has been more uneven. McDonald’s said on Tuesday that it had not experienced any beef shortages. But Shake Shack executives warned this week that the price of beef had “significantly increased.”“We do not, today, expect a supply issue,” the company’s chief executive, Randy Garutti, said during an earnings call on Monday. “However, costs have really jumped.”Wendy’s reliance on fresh beef — a major selling point for the brand — may make it more vulnerable to shortages than some rivals, which use frozen hamburger meat.“It impacts them more quickly, as opposed to some restaurants that have a little bit more frozen options on the menu,” said James Rutherford, an analyst at Stephens who wrote the report on Wendy’s.The report also found geographic differences in how significantly Wendy’s was affected by the shortages. In some states, including New York, Connecticut, Ohio and Michigan, 30 percent or more of the chain’s restaurants were out of beef, whereas other states like Nevada and Arizona did not have any shortages.Food industry executives have warned of looming supply issues since April, when outbreaks at some of the country’s largest meatpacking plants brought production to a halt.After a Smithfield pork plant closed in Sioux Falls, S.D., the company’s chief executive, Kenneth M. Sullivan, said the country was “perilously close to the edge in terms of our meat supply.” Last week, the chairman of Tyson Foods took out full-page ads in The New York Times and The Washington Post warning that “the supply chain is breaking.”It can take about three weeks from the time cattle are slaughtered for the meat to be sold in the grocery store. And cattle producers are hopeful that as plants begin to reopen, the number of animals being harvested will begin to return to more normal levels in the next week or so.Updated May 28, 2020States are reopening bit by bit. This means that more public spaces are available for use and more and more businesses are being allowed to open again. The federal government is largely leaving the decision up to states, and some state leaders are leaving the decision up to local authorities. Even if you aren’t being told to stay at home, it’s still a good idea to limit trips outside and your interaction with other people.Touching contaminated objects and then infecting ourselves with the germs is not typically how the virus spreads. But it can happen. A number of studies of flu, rhinovirus, coronavirus and other microbes have shown that respiratory illnesses, including the new coronavirus, can spread by touching contaminated surfaces, particularly in places like day care centers, offices and hospitals. But a long chain of events has to happen for the disease to spread that way. The best way to protect yourself from coronavirus — whether it’s surface transmission or close human contact — is still social distancing, washing your hands, not touching your face and wearing masks.Common symptoms include fever, a dry cough, fatigue and difficulty breathing or shortness of breath. Some of these symptoms overlap with those of the flu, making detection difficult, but runny noses and stuffy sinuses are less common. The C.D.C. has also added chills, muscle pain, sore throat, headache and a new loss of the sense of taste or smell as symptoms to look out for. Most people fall ill five to seven days after exposure, but symptoms may appear in as few as two days or as many as 14 days.If air travel is unavoidable, there are some steps you can take to protect yourself. Most important: Wash your hands often, and stop touching your face. If possible, choose a window seat. A study from Emory University found that during flu season, the safest place to sit on a plane is by a window, as people sitting in window seats had less contact with potentially sick people. Disinfect hard surfaces. When you get to your seat and your hands are clean, use disinfecting wipes to clean the hard surfaces at your seat like the head and arm rest, the seatbelt buckle, the remote, screen, seat back pocket and the tray table. If the seat is hard and nonporous or leather or pleather, you can wipe that down, too. (Using wipes on upholstered seats could lead to a wet seat and spreading of germs rather than killing them.)More than 40 million people — the equivalent of 1 in 4 U.S. workers — have filed for unemployment benefits since the pandemic took hold. One in five who were working in February reported losing a job or being furloughed in March or the beginning of April, data from a Federal Reserve survey released on May 14 showed, and that pain was highly concentrated among low earners. Fully 39 percent of former workers living in a household earning $40,000 or less lost work, compared with 13 percent in those making more than $100,000, a Fed official said.There is an uptick in people reporting symptoms of chilblains, which are painful red or purple lesions that typically appear in the winter on fingers or toes. The lesions are emerging as yet another symptom of infection with the new coronavirus. Chilblains are caused by inflammation in small blood vessels in reaction to cold or damp conditions, but they are usually common in the coldest winter months. Federal health officials do not include toe lesions in the list of coronavirus symptoms, but some dermatologists are pushing for a change, saying so-called Covid toe should be sufficient grounds for testing.Yes, but make sure you keep six feet of distance between you and people who don’t live in your home. Even if you just hang out in a park, rather than go for a jog or a walk, getting some fresh air, and hopefully sunshine, is a good idea.Taking one’s temperature to look for signs of fever is not as easy as it sounds, as “normal” temperature numbers can vary, but generally, keep an eye out for a temperature of 100.5 degrees Fahrenheit or higher. If you don’t have a thermometer (they can be pricey these days), there are other ways to figure out if you have a fever, or are at risk of Covid-19 complications.The C.D.C. has recommended that all Americans wear cloth masks if they go out in public. This is a shift in federal guidance reflecting new concerns that the coronavirus is being spread by infected people who have no symptoms. Until now, the C.D.C., like the W.H.O., has advised that ordinary people don’t need to wear masks unless they are sick and coughing. Part of the reason was to preserve medical-grade masks for health care workers who desperately need them at a time when they are in continuously short supply. Masks don’t replace hand washing and social distancing.If you’ve been exposed to the coronavirus or think you have, and have a fever or symptoms like a cough or difficulty breathing, call a doctor. They should give you advice on whether you should be tested, how to get tested, and how to seek medical treatment without potentially infecting or exposing others.If you’re sick and you think you’ve been exposed to the new coronavirus, the C.D.C. recommends that you call your healthcare provider and explain your symptoms and fears. They will decide if you need to be tested. Keep in mind that there’s a chance — because of a lack of testing kits or because you’re asymptomatic, for instance — you won’t be able to get tested.Charity Navigator, which evaluates charities using a numbers-based system, has a running list of nonprofits working in communities affected by the outbreak. You can give blood through the American Red Cross, and World Central Kitchen has stepped in to distribute meals in major cities.But in a call with investors on Monday, Tyson executives said that more meatpacking plants were likely to shut down for cleaning as the virus continues to spread. The union that represents plant workers estimates that pork production has fallen by as much as 25 percent, with beef down 10 percent.“There is a lot of volatility” in the meatpacking plants, said Ms. Fish, the meat analyst. “They think they are getting things under control and then there are more issues.”Still, grocery executives say the shortages are only temporary and that most meat remains available, even if certain products have become more scarce. And some major meatpacking facilities have reopened, including the Smithfield pork plant in Sioux Falls.When he arrived at a Wendy’s outside Minneapolis on Monday, Taylor Boyte, 30, noticed that several items on the menu were crossed out in marker. Then he ordered a burger.“They were out of beef,” Mr. Boyte said. “I just kind of chuckled. Being in the middle of the pandemic, it’s pretty understandable. People aren’t prepared for what’s going on.”But there was other food to eat. Mr. Boyte got lunch at Taco Bell instead.Advertisement