https://www.nytimes.com/article/coronavirus-travel-restrictions.html
Coronavirus Travel Restrictions and Bans Globally: Updating List - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
244
AdvertisementSupported byNations across the world have imposed travel restrictions to curb the spread of the coronavirus. Here, the current list of countries and territories limiting entry.By Andrea Salcedo, Sanam Yar and Gina Cherelus[This article is no longer being updated. Find the latest updates on the coronavirus pandemic here.]In recent weeks, many countries around the world, including the United States, have imposed travel restrictions to help curb the spread of the coronavirus. Airport closures, the suspension of all incoming and outgoing flights, and nationwide lockdowns are just some of the measures countries are adopting in an effort to help contain the pandemic.On March 19, the State Department issued a Level 4 “do not travel” advisory, recommending that United States citizens avoid any global travel. This is the highest travel advisory the federal agency can issue. During the same week, the European Union instituted a 30-day ban on nonessential travel to at least 26 European countries from the rest of the world.At least 93 percent of the global population now lives in countries with coronavirus-related travel restrictions, with approximately 3 billion people residing in countries enforcing complete border closures to foreigners, according to recent analysis by the Pew Research Center. This list of countries and territories that have restricted travel, pulled from official government reports and the State Department, will be updated as new measures are announced.If the territory you are seeking information about is not listed, check this list from the State Department with updates about restrictions that have been put in place.GhanaGhana closed it borders to all incoming travelers for two weeks, effective March 22. Travelers who entered the country before March 22 may be subject to quarantine. On April 4, the government of Ghana announced that it would extend the closure for an additional two weeks beginning Sunday, April 5. KenyaOn March 25, the Kenyan government suspended all international flights in and out of the country. People who entered the country between March 23 and March 25 are subject to mandatory quarantine at a government facility. MoroccoThe Moroccan government has declared a “Health State of Emergency” that is in effect until April 20, suspending all regularly scheduled commercial flights to and from the country indefinitely. Though the country announced the suspension of all international passenger flights on March 15, some chartered repatriation flights were arranged for American citizens to depart the country on March 20. NamibiaOn March 24, Namibia’s health minister said that travel into Namibia from all countries was banned for a 30-day period. Citizens and permanent residents are also not allowed to leave the country. Citizens and permanent residents would only be admitted into the country “if their mission is critical to national interest,” and anyone returning from abroad must observe mandatory supervised quarantine for 14 days. Effective March 18, American travelers were denied entry to the country. South AfricaEffective March 26, the South African government began a 21-day lockdown. During this period, the country’s borders are “closed to human activity,” other than for essential services. All airports, land borders, and ports are also closed, and all international and domestic flights have been suspended. ArgentinaOn March 15, Argentina announced it was closing its borders to all incoming foreigners for at least two weeks. The ban does not apply to legal permanent residents, and it has been extended indefinitely. BoliviaAs of March 26, noncitizens are barred from entering the country. On March 25, the Bolivian government announced a total quarantine in the country effective until April 15. All borders, including land borders, are closed, and all international and domestic flights have been suspended, other than government-sanctioned humanitarian and repatriation flights. BrazilOn March 30, Brazil closed its borders for a period of 30 days to most foreign nationals arriving by air who don’t fall into one of several categories outlined here. Permanent residents, citizens and the spouses, domestic partners, children, parents or caregivers of a Brazilian citizen are among the groups of people who may still enter the country.On March 19, Brazil closed all land borders, though there are no entry limitations for travelers arriving by sea. Effective March 17, all people in or entering the country must follow medical advice regarding quarantines. CanadaAs of March 30, all travelers flying into Canada are subject to a health check before boarding their flight. Most foreign nationals, except for those arriving from the United States for essential travel, are barred from entering Canada, effective March 18. There are some exemptions, including immediate family members of a Canadian citizen or a permanent resident, and a more detailed list is available here. On March 18, Canada said it was closing the border with the United States by mutual decision, according to an announcement by Twitter from President Trump.Now, only Americans who commute daily for work, including health care workers, are allowed to enter Canada, said the Canadian prime minister, Justin Trudeau, during a press briefing on March 18. Trucks and trains carrying goods are also exempted from these new measures, which are effective until April 20. The full list of what qualifies as “essential travel” is here.Only four Canadian airports are currently accepting international flights: Toronto Pearson International Airport, Montréal-Pierre Elliott Trudeau International Airport, Vancouver International Airport and Calgary International Airport; domestic flights and those arriving from the United States, Mexico, the Caribbean and Saint Pierre and Miquelon will be exempted.All travelers entering Canada must undergo self-isolation for 14 days.ChileOn March 18, the government closed its borders to all foreigners for an undetermined period. All people entering the country must quarantine for 14 days.ColombiaOn March 23, the country grounded all international flights for a period of 30 days. All international travel into and out of the country is closed. On March 16, the Colombian president announced the country would close its borders until May 30. Costa RicaOnly Costa Rican citizens and their minor children, as well as residents, people whose residency is in process and foreign diplomats, are allowed to enter the country until April 12. The ban applies to all land, sea and air arrivals, though aircrews aren’t subject to the ban. Anyone entering the country must quarantine for 14 days.Effective March 24, foreigners who are Costa Rican residents and leave the country will automatically lose their legal status, making them ineligible for re-entry for the time being, though they will not have to restart the residency process. Dominican RepublicOn March 19, the Dominican Republic suspended the arrival of incoming travelers and “effectively closed the borders” of the country for an initial period of 15 days. Outbound flights will continue to carry foreigners out, for the time being. EcuadorEffective March 16, no one, including citizens and residents, is allowed to enter the country for the next 21 days.El SalvadorOn March 11, El Salvador announced it had barred entry to all foreigners, except accredited diplomats and legal permanent residents.GuatemalaGuatemala President Alejandro Giammattei announced on March 16 that the country was closing its borders for 15 days. Most non-citizens and residents, with certain exceptions for health and security, are barred from entering the country indefinitely. According to the State Department, the Guatemalan government may reassess this decision at any time.MexicoThe United States and Mexico entered a joint initiative March 21 restricting non-essential travel along the U.S.-Mexico land border to prevent the spread of the COVID-19 virus, according to the State Department. Non-essential travel includes travel that is considered tourism or recreational in nature.PeruThe government on March 15 declared a state of emergency and shut down its borders for at least 15 days, starting on March 16. On March 26, the Peruvian president said the country would extend its state of national emergency until April 12. All international travel in and out of the country is closed. United StatesThe State Department on March 19 raised its global travel advisory to a Level 4, a recommendation — not a requirement — that United States citizens either remain in place or return home. This is the agency’s top warning.On March 20, the White House Coronavirus Task Force said it was closing the border with Mexico to any nonessential travel, beginning March 21. The measure came days after President Trump announced that the United States and Canada were closing their border by mutual decision. The border with Canada closed on March 21.The measure allows trade to continue but restricts nonessential travel, such as tourism, from Canada. Canadian nationals who daily commute to the United States for work would still be allowed in.On March 11 the United States barred the entry of all foreign nationals who had visited China, Iran and a group of European countries during the previous 14 days.The ban applies to countries in the Schengen Area, which are Austria, Belgium, Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Italy, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta, Netherlands, Norway, Poland, Portugal, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden and Switzerland.Effective March 16, the ban applies to foreign nationals departing from the United Kingdom and Ireland. As of March 13, all American citizens and legal permanent residents who have been in high-risk areas and return to the United States are required to fly to one of the following 13 airports:Boston-Logan International Airport (BOS), MassachusettsChicago O’Hare International Airport (ORD), IllinoisDallas/Fort Worth International Airport (DFW), TexasDetroit Metropolitan Airport (DTW), MichiganDaniel K. Inouye International Airport (HNL), HawaiiHartsfield-Jackson Atlanta International Airport (ATL), GeorgiaJohn F. Kennedy International Airport (JFK), New YorkLos Angeles International Airport, (LAX), CaliforniaMiami International Airport (MIA), FloridaNewark Liberty International Airport (EWR), New JerseySan Francisco International Airport (SFO), CaliforniaSeattle-Tacoma International Airport (SEA), WashingtonWashington-Dulles International Airport (IAD), VirginiaUruguayForeigners are barred from entering Uruguay until April 13, and the country’s borders to Brazil and Argentina are also closed. There are no regularly scheduled commercial passenger flights entering or departing from the country. VenezuelaOn March 17, all international travel was suspended until April 13. The country’s land borders with Brazil and Colombia are also closed, and the suspensions may be extended for an additional 30 days.CambodiaEffective March 31, the government suspended all visa-free entry and the issuance of all e-visas and visas-on-arrival for foreigners for a period of one month. If urgent travel to the country is needed during this period, all foreigners are required to obtain a visa in advance. The country’s health department on March 14 announced a 30-day suspension of “foreigners” traveling into the country from the United States, France, Germany, Italy and Spain, effective March 17, according to the U.S. Embassy in Cambodia.ChinaChina’s foreign ministry announced on March 26 that it was suspending practically all entry to the country by foreigners and was halting almost all international passenger flights as well. Foreign residents of China and foreigners with previously issued visas would no longer be allowed to enter the country as of midnight March 27.The Civil Aviation Administration of China issued a separate announcement ordering that each domestic or foreign airline only operate a single passenger flight into China each week until further notice. All travelers who enter China will be screened on arrival and are subject to a 14-day quarantine.Hong KongHong Kong, a semiautonomous Chinese region, requires travelers from all countries to self-quarantine for 14 days. Beginning March 25, nonresidents from any location outside mainland China, Macau and Taiwan have been banned from entering Hong Kong for 14 days. Nonresidents from mainland China, Macau and Taiwan who were overseas in the previous 14 days are also barred from entry. IndiaBeginning March 18, “all incoming passenger traffic” by air, land and sea has been barred, except for essential goods and services, according to the Indian Bureau of Immigration. Effective March 22, the government suspended all international flights arriving and departing from India for at least one week; as of April 7 that suspension remains in place. JapanOn April 1, Japan broadened its ban on foreign travelers who had visited a list of at least 76 countries and regions, including the United States and Canada, during the previous 14 days. The list of countries and additional requirements for quarantine and testing were posted on the Japanese National Tourism Organization’s website.As of March 15, Japan has banned entry to foreign travelers with Chinese passports issued by Hubei and Zhejiang provinces, as well as those who have visited regions in China that have been affected by the virus, South Korea, Iran or Italy within the last 14 days. MalaysiaAs of March 16, all foreign nationals, “with very limited exceptions,” are prohibited from entering or transiting through Malaysia until March 31, according to the United States Embassy in Malaysia. On March 25, the restrictions on foreign nationals entering the country were extended until April 14. This end date is subject to further extension at the discretion of the Malaysian government.All travelers arriving in the country from international destinations, including Malaysian citizens, are required to undergo a 14-day quarantine and health inspection. Citizens with a foreign residence permit, if they choose to depart Malaysia, will not be able to return until after April 14.MyanmarOn March 30, international commercial passenger flights arriving to Myanmar were suspended through April 13. On March 19, the government announced the suspension of any entry and exit of foreigners through Myanmar’s land borders. Any incoming citizens will be required to undergo quarantine in a government facility for 14 days after arrival. NepalThe government has suspended all regular international and domestic flights until April 15. Additionally, the country has stopped issuing on-arrival visas to foreigners from March 14 through April 30. All land ports of entry into Nepal are closed until April 30. PhilippinesThe Philippines shut down all travel into and out of the capital of Manila until April 14, according to the United States Embassy there. On March 14, the government said it had “implemented enhanced screening and quarantine measures” and that some areas in Manila were under a curfew from 8 p.m. to 5 a.m.SingaporeAs of March 23, “all short-term visitors (from anywhere in the world) will not be allowed to enter or transit through Singapore,” according to officials.Singapore citizens, residents and “long-term pass holders” returning to the country from anywhere in the world will be issued a “Stay-Home Notice,” which will require them to self-isolate for two weeks. Those returning from the Hubei Province in China must be in quarantine for two weeks. South KoreaEffective April 1, all travelers entering South Korea must undergo a 14-day quarantine. Travelers who are “long-term or residential” may self-quarantine at their own residences, and “most foreign travelers on short-term travel” will quarantine at a government-designated facility at their own expense for 14 days.Additionally, South Korea has restricted the entry of travelers with passports from China’s Hubei Province as well as anyone who has visited that region in the previous 14 days. Korean visas that were issued to travelers in Hubei are canceled.Visa-free entry to Jeju Island for all foreigners, as well as visa-free entry for Chinese nationals and travelers who are headed to China, are suspended.Sri LankaAll international commercial passenger flights have been barred from entering the country since March 19, with the ban extending to April 7. Visas on arrival have been suspended, according to the U.S. Embassy in the country. No cruise passengers and crew are allowed to disembark. TaiwanAs of March 19, all foreigners are banned from entering Taiwan, except for people with Alien Resident Certificates or documentation proving they are traveling for “diplomatic or other official purposes or to fulfill business contracts.” Any incoming travelers must undergo a 14-day quarantine, complete a health declaration form and provide their travel and contact history. From March 24 through April 7, travelers will not be allowed to transit through Taiwan. ThailandEffective April 1, foreigners, excluding those with work permits and diplomats, are not allowed to enter the country. The ban also extends to passengers in transit at international airports. Diplomats and people with work permits must bring special documentation, including a “fit-to-fly certificate” issued within 72 hours of travel and, for diplomats, a “certificate of entry” issued by the Thai Ministry of Foreign Affairs. United Arab EmiratesAll passenger and transit flights in the country have been suspended for two weeks, effective March 25, according to the U.S. Embassy and Consulate in the United Arab Emirates. Emergency evacuation and cargo flights are not affected by the decision, reported the state news agency WAM. The suspension is subject to extension. Beginning March 19, the U.A.E. suspended the entry of valid visa holders who were outside the country, including people with valid resident visas. The issuance of new visas, including visas on arrival, is also halted until April 16. VietnamAs of March 22, all foreigners, including people with a Vietnamese visa exemption certificate, are suspended from entering the country. People who arrived in Vietnam before March 22 were subject to mandatory 14-day quarantine at government facilities. AustraliaEffective March 20, only Australian citizens, residents and their immediate family members may enter the country. New Zealand citizens who normally reside in Australia are also permitted to enter the country. Beginning March 28, all travelers to the country must undergo a 14-day quarantine at a designated facility or hotel in their port of entry. Australian citizens and permanent residents, with few exemptions, are also banned from traveling overseas, effective March 25. New ZealandOn March 19, New Zealand closed its border to “almost all travelers” beginning at 11:59 p.m.Only New Zealand citizens, residents, and their immediate families (partner or spouse, legal guardian and dependent children under the age of 24) are allowed to enter the country. Australian citizens and permanent residents who live in New Zealand can also come in. The government has said it will be making exceptions on a case-by-case basis. For a list of these exceptions, check this official website. All travelers are required to self-isolate for 14 days upon arrival.IsraelOn March 18, the Israeli government announced that only citizens or permanent residents would be permitted to enter the country, though some exceptions may be made for “non-nationals whose lives are based in Israel.” All incoming travelers may be subject to a health screening and mandatory 14-day quarantine in a government facility.As of March 18, the country’s borders with Egypt and Jordan were closed, as were most of the checkpoints between Jerusalem, Bethlehem and its neighboring areas in the West Bank. JordanAs of April 1, all flights, excluding commercial airfreight traffic, were suspended, according to officials. The country’s land and sea borders are also closed to travelers. Any travelers who arrived in Jordan on March 16 were placed under 14-day quarantine in hotels in Amman and at the Dead Sea. LebanonEffective March 19, Rafic Hariri International Airport in Beirut has closed, and all commercial flights from the airport are suspended indefinitely. As of March 12, the land border with Syria was also closed. Saudi Arabia As of April 1, all international passenger traffic and tourist travel to the country has been suspended.Saudi Arabia’s land borders with all neighboring countries is limited to commercial traffic. Regardless of visa or residency status, any travelers who have visited China, Hong Kong, Taiwan, Macao, Iran, United Arab Emirates, Kuwait, Bahrain, Lebanon, Syria, Egypt, Iraq, Italy or South Korea in the previous 14 days are also barred from entering or transiting through the country.On March 17, European Union leaders announced they were closing off at least 26 countries — with more than 400 million people — to nearly all visitors from the rest of the world for at least 30 days. European Union citizens, permanent residents, medical professionals and scientists are exempt, though some countries were asking those returning home to self-isolate for two weeks.Updated May 28, 2020States are reopening bit by bit. This means that more public spaces are available for use and more and more businesses are being allowed to open again. The federal government is largely leaving the decision up to states, and some state leaders are leaving the decision up to local authorities. Even if you aren’t being told to stay at home, it’s still a good idea to limit trips outside and your interaction with other people.Touching contaminated objects and then infecting ourselves with the germs is not typically how the virus spreads. But it can happen. A number of studies of flu, rhinovirus, coronavirus and other microbes have shown that respiratory illnesses, including the new coronavirus, can spread by touching contaminated surfaces, particularly in places like day care centers, offices and hospitals. But a long chain of events has to happen for the disease to spread that way. The best way to protect yourself from coronavirus — whether it’s surface transmission or close human contact — is still social distancing, washing your hands, not touching your face and wearing masks.Common symptoms include fever, a dry cough, fatigue and difficulty breathing or shortness of breath. Some of these symptoms overlap with those of the flu, making detection difficult, but runny noses and stuffy sinuses are less common. The C.D.C. has also added chills, muscle pain, sore throat, headache and a new loss of the sense of taste or smell as symptoms to look out for. Most people fall ill five to seven days after exposure, but symptoms may appear in as few as two days or as many as 14 days.If air travel is unavoidable, there are some steps you can take to protect yourself. Most important: Wash your hands often, and stop touching your face. If possible, choose a window seat. A study from Emory University found that during flu season, the safest place to sit on a plane is by a window, as people sitting in window seats had less contact with potentially sick people. Disinfect hard surfaces. When you get to your seat and your hands are clean, use disinfecting wipes to clean the hard surfaces at your seat like the head and arm rest, the seatbelt buckle, the remote, screen, seat back pocket and the tray table. If the seat is hard and nonporous or leather or pleather, you can wipe that down, too. (Using wipes on upholstered seats could lead to a wet seat and spreading of germs rather than killing them.)More than 40 million people — the equivalent of 1 in 4 U.S. workers — have filed for unemployment benefits since the pandemic took hold. One in five who were working in February reported losing a job or being furloughed in March or the beginning of April, data from a Federal Reserve survey released on May 14 showed, and that pain was highly concentrated among low earners. Fully 39 percent of former workers living in a household earning $40,000 or less lost work, compared with 13 percent in those making more than $100,000, a Fed official said.There is an uptick in people reporting symptoms of chilblains, which are painful red or purple lesions that typically appear in the winter on fingers or toes. The lesions are emerging as yet another symptom of infection with the new coronavirus. Chilblains are caused by inflammation in small blood vessels in reaction to cold or damp conditions, but they are usually common in the coldest winter months. Federal health officials do not include toe lesions in the list of coronavirus symptoms, but some dermatologists are pushing for a change, saying so-called Covid toe should be sufficient grounds for testing.Yes, but make sure you keep six feet of distance between you and people who don’t live in your home. Even if you just hang out in a park, rather than go for a jog or a walk, getting some fresh air, and hopefully sunshine, is a good idea.Taking one’s temperature to look for signs of fever is not as easy as it sounds, as “normal” temperature numbers can vary, but generally, keep an eye out for a temperature of 100.5 degrees Fahrenheit or higher. If you don’t have a thermometer (they can be pricey these days), there are other ways to figure out if you have a fever, or are at risk of Covid-19 complications.The C.D.C. has recommended that all Americans wear cloth masks if they go out in public. This is a shift in federal guidance reflecting new concerns that the coronavirus is being spread by infected people who have no symptoms. Until now, the C.D.C., like the W.H.O., has advised that ordinary people don’t need to wear masks unless they are sick and coughing. Part of the reason was to preserve medical-grade masks for health care workers who desperately need them at a time when they are in continuously short supply. Masks don’t replace hand washing and social distancing.If you’ve been exposed to the coronavirus or think you have, and have a fever or symptoms like a cough or difficulty breathing, call a doctor. They should give you advice on whether you should be tested, how to get tested, and how to seek medical treatment without potentially infecting or exposing others.If you’re sick and you think you’ve been exposed to the new coronavirus, the C.D.C. recommends that you call your healthcare provider and explain your symptoms and fears. They will decide if you need to be tested. Keep in mind that there’s a chance — because of a lack of testing kits or because you’re asymptomatic, for instance — you won’t be able to get tested.Charity Navigator, which evaluates charities using a numbers-based system, has a running list of nonprofits working in communities affected by the outbreak. You can give blood through the American Red Cross, and World Central Kitchen has stepped in to distribute meals in major cities.The 26 countries, members of the European Union, include: Austria, Belgium, Bulgaria, Croatia, Cyprus, the Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Italy, Latvia, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta, Netherlands, Poland, Portugal, Romania, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden.Ireland is the only member of the European Union not covered by the border closings because it has a passport-free agreement with Britain, which left the bloc earlier this year and has never been a part of the open-border zone.It is up to each country to enforce these new measures as the bloc does not have the ability to enforce it. Each country is allowed to make any changes on who it allows in and under which circumstances.AustriaAustria has suspended entry by air for “third-country nationals” — this group includes any citizens from countries outside the European Union, the European Economic Area, and Switzerland. Exceptions will be made for passengers in transit and people who hold either a D visa or Austrian residence permit. All incoming travelers are subject to a 14-day home quarantine.For entry into Austria through land borders, travelers from Italy, Switzerland, Liechtenstein, Germany, Hungary and Slovenia must provide a medical certificate with a negative coronavirus test result, otherwise they will be turned away. BelgiumThe government of Belgium declared all nonessential travel outside of Belgium is forbidden indefinitely, according to the United States Embassy in Belgium. Any travelers who are permitted entry must self-quarantine for 14 days.CroatiaMost foreign nationals are barred from entering Croatia, with few exceptions. Any foreign travelers who are granted entry from Iran, Italy, the Hubei province of China, and specific areas of Germany, Slovenia and South Korea, must quarantine in government facilities for 14 days. A specific list of the countries is available here, and travelers from a list of more than 60 other countries who are granted entry will be subject to 14 days of self-isolation and health monitoring.As of March 18, all cross-border train travel is suspended, according to the U.S. Embassy in Croatia.Czech RepublicAs of March 16, any foreign travelers “without permanent or long-term residence” are banned from entering the country, and borders will remain closed indefinitely. Effective March 31, any incoming travelers, including Czech citizens, must undergo a 14-day quarantine. Citizens or foreigners with a permanent or temporary stay of more than 90 days are not allowed to leave the countryDenmarkDenmark closed its borders to most foreign travelers until April 13. Danish citizens, people with Danish work or residency permits, and those who have residence in Greenland or Faroe Islands can still enter the country. People the government deems as having “a critical purpose of travel” are also permitted entry.FranceThe French government announced that as of March 17, the European Union is closing its borders, according to the U.S. Embassy and Consulates in France.Travelers being evacuated from other countries by the French government must undergo quarantine. Travel across the borders of the Schengen Area is significantly restricted.Medical professionals at the Charles de Gaulle airport in Paris will meet flights from China, Hong Kong, Macao, Singapore, South Korea, Iran and certain regions in Italy to check passengers for symptoms and answer questions.GermanyOn March 16, Germany closed its borders with Austria, Denmark, France, Luxembourg and Switzerland. German citizens and residents may still enter the country. Most foreign travelers are barred from entry, except for people who must travel to Germany for work (with appropriate documentation), travelers with urgent reasons such as the death of an immediate family member, or people who must transit through Germany to return to their home country.GreeceFrom March 18 through April 18, non–European Union citizens are barred from entering Greece. Transiting travelers, government delegation members, long-term residents and the spouses and minor children of European Union and Schengen area nationals are still permitted entry. On March 16, the country declared a mandatory 14-day self-quarantine for all international travelers.Greece’s borders with Albania and North Macedonia are closed. Flights from Italy and Spain are suspended; ferry service from Italy to Greece is also suspended. Cruise ships and tourism boats cannot dock in Greece as of March 15.HungaryEffective March 26, Hungary banned all passenger transport by air, rail or bus into the country. Only Hungarian citizens, permanent resident card holders of the European Economic Area (E.U. member states, Switzerland and Norway), other permanent resident card holders who have close Hungarian relatives, and diplomats with resident cards are able to enter the country.Arriving citizens must undergo medical examinations upon entry. Foreigner travelers transiting through Hungary into neighboring countries and international freight transportation drivers are exempt from the ban.IrelandAs of April 6, there are no entry restrictions in Ireland, according to the Irish government. Any travelers entering the country, with the exception of people from Northern Ireland, must “self-quarantine or self-isolate” on arrival for a 14-day period. The country has closed schools, museums, galleries and tourist sites, and the Trump administration’s ban on travel from European countries extended to Ireland, effective March 16.ItalyItaly has been one of the hardest-hit countries in the pandemic and the country has been placed on lockdown in an attempt to stop spreading the infection. Effective March 17, all individuals entering Italy are subject to self-quarantine in their home or hotel for 14 days. Travelers must also inform the Local Health Authority of their entry immediately, and prove they are either returning to their residence or entering the country for “justifiable work reasons, special needs or health emergencies.” As of March 3, passengers with a temperature higher than 99.5 degrees were not allowed to board flights to the United States.All travelers flying into Italy are subject to temperature screening in Italy’s major airports, and the country has suspended flights from China and Taiwan.LatviaOn March 17, Latvia closed its borders to anyone who is not a citizen or legal resident, according to the U.S. Embassy in Latvia. There are no restrictions on leaving the country. On April 1, all passenger air and ferry travel was barred.LithuaniaAs of April 6, only citizens and resident-holders are allowed entry to the country. Lithuania declared a two-week nationwide quarantine on March 14, which includes closing the country’s borders to all foreign nationals, the government announced. Anyone returning from abroad will be required to self-isolate for 14 days.The NetherlandsAll commercial passenger flights to and from Austria, Italy, Iran and Spain — with the exception of repatriation flights — are suspended. Most non-European Union citizens and nonresidents are barred from entering the Netherlands. Exceptions include family members of European Union citizens and nationals from the United Kingdom, Norway, Iceland, Switzerland and Liechtenstein (and their family members).Any travelers arriving in the Netherlands on flights from the United States, China, Hong Kong, South Korea, Italy, Spain and Austria are subject to a 14-day period of self-isolation. North MacedoniaAll airports in North Macedonia are closed for commercial flights indefinitely. Only citizens and legal residents are permitted entry into North Macedonia and are subject to quarantine after entry. The country’s land borders with Albania, Bulgaria, Greece, Kosovo and Serbia are also closed. Citizens and legal residents of North Macedonia who traveled to a medium- or high-risk country in the past two weeks are allowed to enter but are subject to quarantine, according to the U.S. Embassy in North Macedonia.NorwayOn March 16, Norway closed its borders to foreign nationals who don’t have a residence permit. The Norwegian Directorate of Health has strongly encouraged citizens to avoid leisure travel, domestic and international journeys that are not strictly necessary, and public transportation.PolandSince March 15, only Polish citizens, resident-status holders, and the spouses and children of citizens may enter the country. Foreigners with work permits, diplomatic status, or a Karta Polaka — an ID card for people with a claim to Polish heritage — may also enter.All incoming travelers must undergo a health inspection and provide contact information upon arrival. They are also subject to a 14-day quarantine.RussiaOn March 18, the Russian government banned the entry of all foreign citizens until May 1, according to the U.S. Embassy in Russia. “The ban does not apply to diplomats, airplane crew members, permanent residents of the Russian Federation or transit passengers.”SerbiaSerbia declared a state of emergency effective March 15, which prohibits all foreign nationals, excluding diplomats and legal residents, from entering the country. All commercial flights to and from Serbia are suspended indefinitely, and all borders are closed to foreign travelers. Anyone admitted into country from March 14 onward is subject to a mandatory 28-day self-isolation.SlovakiaThe Slovak Republic closed all three international airports on March 12, and since March 13, “all the persons coming to Slovakia from abroad are obliged to remain in quarantine for 14 days.”Additionally, international bus and rail travel have been suspended, according to officials.SpainOn March 16, the Spanish government announced the closing of its land borders, allowing only citizens, residents and others with special circumstances to enter the country. Only Spanish citizens or citizens and legal residents of European Union and Schengen area countries may enter the country.SwitzerlandAs of March 26, any foreign nationals who do not hold a valid residence or work permit will be denied entry to the country, except for citizens and residents of Liechtenstein. TurkeyOn March 27, President Recep Tayyip Erdogan announced that Turkey had suspended all foreign flights. Foreigners transiting from or hailing from an extensive list of countries, including Canada, India and Switzerland, are banned from entry. You can see the full list here. Turkish citizens or residents arriving from any of those countries are subject to a 14-day quarantine.The Turkish government has also closed its land borders with Iran and Iraq, as well as the Dilucu border crossing with Azerbaijan and the Sarp border crossing with Georgia.UkraineAll international commercial passenger transit is currently suspended, except for special repatriation flights. All foreigners without residence permits are barred from entering Ukraine. Effective April 6, all incoming travelers must undergo a 14-day supervised quarantine period. United KingdomThe United Kingdom has not implemented any entry restrictions, but it is “advising against “all but essential travel to some countries, cities and regions,” the country’s Foreign and Commonwealth Office said. On March 14, President Trump expanded the travel ban on foreign nationals to the United Kingdom.Officials in the United Kingdom are also monitoring direct flights into the country from certain areas, according to the U.S. Embassy, and informing incoming passengers about how to report any symptoms.Keith Bradsher, Nancy Coleman, Ernesto Londoño, Aimee Ortiz, and Motoko Rich contributed reporting.Advertisement