https://www.nytimes.com/2020/05/27/us/george-floyd-minneapolis-death.html
The Death of George Floyd in Minneapolis: What We Know So Far - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
2
AdvertisementSupported byMr. Floyd died after being handcuffed and pinned to the ground by an officer’s knee in an episode that was recorded on video by a bystander, inciting condemnation and protests.By The New York Times[Follow our live coverage of the protests in Minneapolis over George Floyd’s death.]George Floyd, a 46-year-old African-American man, died on Monday after being handcuffed and pinned to the ground by a white police officer’s knee in an incident that was recorded on video and incited large protests in Minneapolis and other cities in the days that followed.The explosive footage, recorded by a bystander and shared widely on social media early Tuesday, led to community outrage, an F.B.I. civil rights investigation and the firing and arrest of the officer, Derek Chauvin. The Minneapolis Police Department also fired three officers who were with him at the scene.On Friday, Mr. Chauvin, 44, was charged with third-degree murder and second-degree manslaughter, charges that carry a combined maximum 35-year sentence.The other fired officers have been identified as Thomas Lane, Tou Thao and J. Alexander Kueng.After Mr. Chauvin’s arrest was announced, Mr. Floyd’s relatives in a statement called the charges “a welcome but overdue step on the road to justice.”But the family also said the charges did not go far enough, according to the statement, which was released by Ben Crump, a civil rights lawyer representing Mr. Floyd’s family.“We expected a first-degree murder charge,” the statement said. “We want a first-degree murder charge. And we want to see the other officers arrested.”“The pain that the black community feels over this murder and what it reflects about the treatment of black people in America is raw and is spilling out onto streets across America,” it added.Mr. Floyd lived in St. Louis Park, a Minneapolis suburb. He was pronounced dead at 9:25 p.m. Monday at Hennepin County Medical Center, according to the medical examiner.The preliminary results from an autopsy found that Mr. Floyd did not appear to have died from strangulation or asphyxiation.“Mr. Floyd had underlying health conditions, including coronary artery disease and hypertensive heart disease,” prosecutors said in a criminal complaint, which also listed “potential intoxicants.”The combined effects of his conditions and the way the police restrained him “likely contributed to his death,” the complaint said.Mr. Floyd grew up in Houston, in a black neighborhood south of downtown known as the Third Ward, and was raised in a house with his siblings and two cousins, Shareeduh Tate and Tera Brown. Their mothers were sisters, Ms. Tate said.[Read more about George Floyd and Derek Chauvin once working together.]A reporter for a Houston television station posted a video clip on Twitter of Mr. Floyd scoring a touchdown at a high school football game nearly 30 years ago. He was a tight end for the Jack Yates High School team, and the clip shows Mr. Floyd leaping to catch a pass in the end zone during a 1992 game at Delmar Stadium in Houston.Mr. Floyd graduated from Yates High in 1993, the Houston school district confirmed on Wednesday.Cyril N. White, 45, said he knew Mr. Floyd when they were both star high school athletes playing basketball. Both received scholarships to play in college, with Mr. Floyd going to a community college in Florida, Mr. White said.After college, Mr. Floyd was one of the first players recruited by Mr. White when he set up a club team to play exhibition matches against college teams around Texas, Oklahoma, Arkansas and Louisiana, and later in China, although by that time Mr. Floyd had left the team.Mr. Floyd, known as “Big Floyd” to his teammates, given his 6-foot-7-inch height and hefty build, played power forward. He never got into a fight or received so much as a technical foul, Mr. White recalled.“Gentle giant, gentle giant,” he said. “He was a natural comedian, a life-of-the-party type guy, real easygoing.”The club team, To God Be The Glory Sports, was not a church group, but members prayed together, and Mr. Floyd participated, Mr. White said. Mr. Floyd left after two years, saying he needed to work to take care of his new daughter.Mr. White lamented how his friend had died: “They dehumanized him and treated him like a piece of garbage that was expendable. That is the worst.”Ms. Tate said her cousin moved to Minneapolis four or five years ago, and Ms. Brown said he talked about the city as a welcoming place.“He was happy there. He had made friends and had talked about training to become a truck driver,” said Ms. Brown, 48, an accounting manager. “He came home for his mother’s funeral two years ago, and he told me he had decided to stay.”Jovanni Thunstrom, the owner of Conga Latin Bistro in Minneapolis, said he employed Mr. Floyd as a bouncer at the restaurant, and was also his landlord.“No one had nothing bad to say about him,” Mr. Thunstrom said. “They all are shocked he’s dead. He never caused a fight or was rude to people.”Mr. Thunstrom said Mr. Floyd paid his rent last week and told him that he was looking for a new job because Conga Latin Bistro has been closed to on-site dining since March because of the coronavirus.In the year before their fateful encounter, Mr. Floyd and Mr. Chauvin worked security at the same club, El Nuevo Rodeo.Maya Santamaria, who sold the club in January, said she doubted that the two men interacted.The arrest of Mr. Floyd took place on Monday evening. The Minneapolis Police Department said in a statement that officers had responded to a call about a man suspected of forgery. The police said the man was found sitting on top of a blue car and “appeared to be under the influence.”“He was ordered to step from his car,” the department’s statement said. “After he got out, he physically resisted officers. Officers were able to get the suspect into handcuffs and noted he appeared to be suffering medical distress.”The statement said that officers had called for an ambulance.On Tuesday morning, without referring to the video recorded by a bystander, the police updated a statement, titled “Man Dies After Medical Incident During Police Interaction,” saying that additional information had “been made available” and that the F.B.I. was joining the investigation.Mr. Floyd’s fatal encounter with the police began just before 8 p.m. on Monday, when he entered Cup Foods, a community store run by four brothers. A store clerk claimed that Mr. Floyd paid for cigarettes with a counterfeit $20 bill. The police got a call from the store at 8:01 p.m.Officers found Mr. Floyd outside the store in a parked blue car with two passengers, according to charging documents.Soon, additional police units arrived and the officers tried to get Mr. Floyd into a police vehicle.“Mr. Floyd did not voluntarily get in the car and struggled with the officers, intentionally falling down, saying he was not going in the car, and refusing to stand still,” according to the charging documents.Mr. Floyd began saying repeatedly that he could not breathe.Mr. Chauvin tried to place him in the police car with Mr. Kueng’s help.At 8:19 p.m., Mr. Chauvin pulled Mr. Floyd out of the passenger side of the squad car. Mr. Floyd hit the ground, face down, handcuffs still on. Mr. Kueng held Mr. Floyd’s back while Mr. Lane held his legs.Mr. Chauvin lodged his left knee in “the area of Mr. Floyd’s head and neck,” the documents said, and Mr. Floyd continued to protest: “I can’t breathe,” he said repeatedly.He called out, “Mama.” He said, “Please.”One of the officers dismissed his pleas.“You are talking fine,” one officer said, according to the charging documents.At least one officer was worried: Mr. Lane asked if the officers should roll Mr. Floyd over on his side.“No, staying put where we got him,” Mr. Chauvin replied.“I am worried about excited delirium or whatever,” Mr. Lane said.“That’s why we have him on his stomach,” Mr. Chauvin responded.At 8:24 p.m., Mr. Floyd stopped moving.For two minutes and 53 seconds after Mr. Floyd had stopped protesting and became unresponsive, Mr. Chauvin continued to kneel.The officer kept his knee on Mr. Floyd’s neck for a total of eight minutes and 46 seconds.The report noted that officers are trained to know that restraining individuals the way Mr. Chauvin restrained Mr. Floyd is “inherently dangerous.”transcriptArrested man: [moaning] “What you trying to say?” Police officer: “Relax.” Arrested man: “Man, I can’t breathe — my face —” [inaudible] Police officer: “What do you want?” Arrested man: “I can’t breathe!” Bystander 1: “How long you all got to hold him down?” Unidentified speaker: “Don’t do drugs, kids —” Bystander 2: “This ain’t about drugs, bro.” [inaudible conversation] Bystander 2: “He is human, bro.” Bystander 1: “His nose —” Bystander 2: “ — right now bro, you know it’s broken. You can’t even look at me like a man because you a bum, bro. He’s not even resisting arrest right now, bro.” Bystander 1: “His nose is bleeding.” Bystander 3: He’s passed out!” Bystander 2: “You [expletive] stopping his breathing, right now, bro. You think that’s cool? You think that’s cool? What is that? What do you think that is? You say — you call what he’s doing, OK?” Police officer: “Get back!” Bystander 2: “You’re calling what he’s doing OK. You call what he’s doing OK, bro?” Police officer: “Only firefighters —” Bystander 4: “Yes, I am from Minneapolis.” Bystander 2: “Bro, you, you, you call — you think that’s OK? Check his pulse!” Bystander 4: “The fact that you guys aren’t checking his pulse, and doing compressions if he needs them, you guys are on —” Bystander 1: “Oh my God!” [inaudible] Bystander 4: “OK, yeah, and I have your name tag.” Bystander 5: “Freedom of speech.” [shouting] Bystander 2: “Don’t touch me!”Bystanders plead and curse, begging the officer to stop. An ambulance medic arrives and, reaching under the officer’s knee, feels for a pulse on the man’s neck.The medic turns away, and a stretcher is wheeled over. Mr. Floyd is rolled onto the stretcher, loaded into an ambulance and taken away.The video did not show what had happened before he was pinned to the ground by his neck.Jacob Frey, the Minneapolis mayor, said on Tuesday that he did not know how the initial police statement, describing a “medical incident,” had come to be written, but he said he wanted to be “absolutely as transparent as possible.”“It’s the kind of thing where you don’t hide from the truth, you lean into it, because our city is going to be better off for it, no matter how ugly, awful it is,” he said. “If it points out the institutional racism that we are still working through right now, well, good — it means that we’ve got a lot of work to go.”On Tuesday afternoon, Mr. Frey tweeted that the four officers involved in the case had been terminated. “This is the right call,” he said.The Police Department’s statement said that no weapons had been used and that the officers’ body cameras were recording.Mr. Frey said he had asked the F.B.I. to investigate, and in a statement posted on social media said, “Being black in America should not be a death sentence.”The F.B.I. is conducting a federal civil rights investigation, the Minnesota Bureau of Criminal Apprehension said in a statement.The Police Officers Federation of Minneapolis has not responded to requests for comment, but the head of the union has said in a statement to the local news media that people should not rush to judgment while the investigation continues.“Our officers are fully cooperating,” the union head, Lt. Bob Kroll, said. “We must review all video. We must wait for the medical examiner’s report.”Thomas M. Kelly, a lawyer representing Mr. Chauvin in the investigation, could not immediately be reached for comment following Mr. Chauvin’s arrest.transcript“… prosecute the police. No justice, no peace, prosecute the police. No justice, no peace, prosecute the police.” “I can’t breathe. I can’t breathe. I can’t breathe. I can’t breathe.” “I want to hear you all say, ‘It could have been me.’” Crowd: “It could have been me.” [cars honking, crowd shouting] “Fall back!” [blast] [explosions]In Houston, friends and relatives gathered on Tuesday to remember Mr. Floyd in Emancipation Park, a site that was originally purchased by former slaves in the late 1800s. The Third Ward, where he grew up, has been a hub of social activism in Houston for decades.Ms. Tate said she saw the video on Tuesday morning but did not realize the man in the street in Minneapolis was the cousin she grew up with.“I remember thinking how horrible this was, that a family’s loved one was murdered in the streets,” said Ms. Tate, 49, a registered nurse. “Maybe five minutes later I got the call confirming my cousin was on that video.”“I went back and looked,” she said. “The first time, it didn’t have audio. The second time, the audio was on. I heard the first, ‘I can’t breathe,’ and I knew it was him.”Since the release of the video, hundreds of demonstrators have poured into the Minneapolis streets every night to protest Mr. Floyd’s death.Officers have used tear gas and fired rubber bullets into the crowds.Images on television and social media have captured businesses being lit on fire and people carrying goods out of a store that had been vandalized. Some demonstrators have gathered at the house of Mr. Chauvin and the house of the local prosecutor, according to The Star Tribune.State officials said that a series of errors and misjudgments — including the Minneapolis police abandoning a precinct on Thursday that protesters overtook and burned — had allowed demonstrators to create what Gov. Tim Walz called “absolute chaos.”On Friday, demonstrators returned to the street for a fourth consecutive night in violation of a curfew imposed by Mr. Walz, who activated the National Guard to help the police patrol the streets. On Friday, protesters again overwhelmed law enforcement.Minnesota’s top officials acknowledged on Saturday morning that they underestimated the destruction that protesters in Minneapolis were capable of inflicting. The curfew did little to stop people from burning buildings and turning the city’s streets into a smoky battleground.Protests have spread across the country to Los Angeles, New York, Boston and Louisville, Ky., where demonstrators have protested the March shooting by the police of Breonna Taylor, a young black woman who worked as an emergency medical technician. That shooting is also under federal investigation.Jamar B. Nelson, 41, a longtime Minneapolis community activist, said he and others had been calling for calm after the clashes.Mr. Nelson described the relationship between the police and the city’s black community as fractured.“The truth is, we do not have a good history,” he said, describing the Police Department as “racist, bigoted and uncaring about the black community.” But he said the current police chief, Medaria Arradondo, had been trying to repair the relationship.“Him firing the four officers expeditiously is a big deal,” Mr. Nelson said.As the video spread on social media, the arrest quickly drew comparisons to the case of Eric Garner, a black man who died in New York police custody in 2014 after an officer held him in a chokehold. Mr. Garner’s repeated plea of “I can’t breathe” — also recorded by a cellphone — became a rallying cry at demonstrations against police misconduct around the country.Similar high-profile cases have generated large protests and given rise to a national debate over police conduct toward black people, as happened in 2016 after an African-American man, Philando Castile, was shot dead by a police officer during a traffic stop in a suburb of St. Paul, Minn. The officer, Jeronimo Yanez, was later acquitted of second-degree manslaughter and of endangering safety by discharging a firearm in the shooting. Mr. Kelly, Mr. Chauvin’s lawyer, represented Officer Yanez in that case.Former Vice President Joseph R. Biden Jr., the presumptive Democratic presidential nominee, has condemned the force used by the officers in Minneapolis.“George Floyd deserved better and his family deserves justice,” Mr. Biden tweeted on Tuesday night. “His life mattered.”On Friday, he addressed the nation in a brief speech from his Wilmington, Del., home and called on white Americans to confront the enduring inequities faced by black Americans.“The pain is too intense for one community to bear alone,” Mr. Biden said.President Trump has called Mr. Floyd’s death “a very very sad event,” and later tweeted that he has asked for the F.B.I. investigation to be expedited, adding, “My heart goes out to George’s family and friends. Justice will be served!”Early on Friday, Mr. Trump suggested on Twitter that protesters could be shot.“These THUGS are dishonoring the memory of George Floyd, and I won’t let that happen,” Mr. Trump said. “Just spoke to Governor Tim Walz and told him that the Military is with him all the way. Any difficulty and we will assume control but, when the looting starts, the shooting starts. Thank you!”On Friday, Mr. Walz said President Trump’s tweet was “just not helpful.”“In the moment where we’re at, in a moment that is so volatile, anything we do to add fuel to that fire is really, really challenging,” he told reporters.Reporting was contributed by Maria Cramer, Christine Hauser, Derrick Bryson Taylor, Neil Vigdor, Audra D.S. Burch, John Eligon, Neil MacFarquhar and Manny Fernandez.Advertisement