https://www.nytimes.com/2020/05/30/nyregion/coronavirus-new-york-live-updates.html
Cuomo Focuses on Quelling Virus Hot Spots in N.Y.C. Before Reopening - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
310
AdvertisementSupported byAs New York City looks to enter Phase 1 of reopening on June 8, Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo said officials were preparing hospitals for a potential uptick in coronavirus cases.  	Cases and deaths in New York State  See maps of the coronavirus outbreak in New York » As New York City looks toward reopening on June 8, Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo said on Saturday that state officials were focusing on controlling hot spots in the city and preparing its hospitals to deal with a potential second spike. Since late March, the city has been all but paralyzed under the devastating weight of the outbreak, which has forced thousands of businesses to shutter and almost 900,000 people to lose their jobs.Under Phase 1 of reopening, retail stores will be allowed to open for curbside or in-store pickup and nonessential construction and manufacturing can resume, sending as many as 400,000 people back to work.In the coming week, officials will focus on ensuring the city’s 11 public hospitals and more than 100 private hospitals have “surge and flex” capacity to deal with a potential uptick in new virus patients, Mr. Cuomo said on Saturday.“We want to make sure we have that refined over the next week, because if we have a problem we need all these hospitals to work together,” Mr. Cuomo said during a news conference in the Bronx.Mr. Cuomo said officials will also target the 10 ZIP codes in the city with the highest infection rates, distributing masks and hand sanitizers and opening an additional testing site in each ZIP code. Those 10 hardest-hit neighborhoods are mostly in the Bronx and Brooklyn, and are predominantly low-income and minority communities. The infection rate in the 10457 ZIP code in the Bronx, for example, was 50 percent, compared to 19.9 percent for the city as a whole.In mid-May, other parts of the state began to reopen after meeting seven public-health benchmarks set by the governor. New York City is the only region that has not met those criteria. The city does not have enough hospital beds available or contact tracers in place being Phase 1, but Mr. Cuomo and Mayor Bill de Blasio have said they expect the city to meet the benchmarks by June 8.Still, they have cautioned that New Yorkers needed to continue taking precautions to keep the virus in check. More than 5,000 people in New York City tested positive for the virus last week — a steep drop from early April, when 40,000 people a week were testing positive, but still a significant number.On Saturday, Mr. Cuomo also signed a bill to give death benefits to the family members of public employees who died because of the coronavirus. “It is the least that we can do,” he said.On Saturday, Gov. Philip D. Murphy of New Jersey announced 113 new virus-related deaths, bringing the state’s toll to 11,634. It was 18 fewer deaths than the state reported the previous day. He also reported 910 new confirmed positive cases in posts on social media, pushing the total to 159,608 cases in the state.The new figures came as the state is preparing to fully reopen child care services and some summer programs for children to begin operating over the next several weeks.On Friday, the governor signed an executive order allowing child care services to open to anyone on June 15 — they have been open for children of essential workers and health care workers.“In order to continue our momentum in restarting New Jersey’s economy, we must prepare our workforce to return to their jobs by ensuring a continuum of care for their children,” Governor Murphy said in a statement. “Our child care centers, youth day camps, and organized sports will adhere to strict public health and safety protocols so that New Jerseyans can confidently participate in the restart and recovery process.”Outdoor, non-contact sports practices can begin on June 22, and youth day camps, including city summer programs, can open July 6.The executive order excludes residential and overnight camps.Where do you live? Brooklyn.How has it been working during the pandemic?It has been scary, and it’s getting scarier because people are starting to come out. My bus is getting more and more crowded. This is not good. Before it was essentially essential workers riding the bus, but now it’s people going out to meet friends. Some aren’t wearing masks or gloves anymore.How crowded?It gets crowded after 30 people, so I drive by and won’t pick up passengers if the bus is too crowded. I have high blood pressure, so it’s risky for me. We need to keep doing the social distancing.And advice or suggestions to make your job safer?Maybe they should adjust the schedule so that buses don’t get crowded. [The M.T.A.] just two weeks ago started putting up this plastic partition.What do you do on your day off?I have a wife and two kids. I live in Brooklyn. I stay at home, I don’t go out except for groceries because I’m too scared. I’m 58 and have high blood pressure, so this is scary for me. I watch TV, TNC, to keep things going.Did you ever get tested?I got tested in April and was negative. But who knows how things may turn out.Mayor Bill de Blasio said this week that when New York City begins reopening at least 200,000 idled workers would return to their jobs.This raised a big question: How will they get to work?During the pandemic, New Yorkers have come to regard their city’s mass transit system as a gigantic rolling petri dish. Updated May 28, 2020States are reopening bit by bit. This means that more public spaces are available for use and more and more businesses are being allowed to open again. The federal government is largely leaving the decision up to states, and some state leaders are leaving the decision up to local authorities. Even if you aren’t being told to stay at home, it’s still a good idea to limit trips outside and your interaction with other people.Touching contaminated objects and then infecting ourselves with the germs is not typically how the virus spreads. But it can happen. A number of studies of flu, rhinovirus, coronavirus and other microbes have shown that respiratory illnesses, including the new coronavirus, can spread by touching contaminated surfaces, particularly in places like day care centers, offices and hospitals. But a long chain of events has to happen for the disease to spread that way. The best way to protect yourself from coronavirus — whether it’s surface transmission or close human contact — is still social distancing, washing your hands, not touching your face and wearing masks.Common symptoms include fever, a dry cough, fatigue and difficulty breathing or shortness of breath. Some of these symptoms overlap with those of the flu, making detection difficult, but runny noses and stuffy sinuses are less common. The C.D.C. has also added chills, muscle pain, sore throat, headache and a new loss of the sense of taste or smell as symptoms to look out for. Most people fall ill five to seven days after exposure, but symptoms may appear in as few as two days or as many as 14 days.If air travel is unavoidable, there are some steps you can take to protect yourself. Most important: Wash your hands often, and stop touching your face. If possible, choose a window seat. A study from Emory University found that during flu season, the safest place to sit on a plane is by a window, as people sitting in window seats had less contact with potentially sick people. Disinfect hard surfaces. When you get to your seat and your hands are clean, use disinfecting wipes to clean the hard surfaces at your seat like the head and arm rest, the seatbelt buckle, the remote, screen, seat back pocket and the tray table. If the seat is hard and nonporous or leather or pleather, you can wipe that down, too. (Using wipes on upholstered seats could lead to a wet seat and spreading of germs rather than killing them.)More than 40 million people — the equivalent of 1 in 4 U.S. workers — have filed for unemployment benefits since the pandemic took hold. One in five who were working in February reported losing a job or being furloughed in March or the beginning of April, data from a Federal Reserve survey released on May 14 showed, and that pain was highly concentrated among low earners. Fully 39 percent of former workers living in a household earning $40,000 or less lost work, compared with 13 percent in those making more than $100,000, a Fed official said.There is an uptick in people reporting symptoms of chilblains, which are painful red or purple lesions that typically appear in the winter on fingers or toes. The lesions are emerging as yet another symptom of infection with the new coronavirus. Chilblains are caused by inflammation in small blood vessels in reaction to cold or damp conditions, but they are usually common in the coldest winter months. Federal health officials do not include toe lesions in the list of coronavirus symptoms, but some dermatologists are pushing for a change, saying so-called Covid toe should be sufficient grounds for testing.Yes, but make sure you keep six feet of distance between you and people who don’t live in your home. Even if you just hang out in a park, rather than go for a jog or a walk, getting some fresh air, and hopefully sunshine, is a good idea.Taking one’s temperature to look for signs of fever is not as easy as it sounds, as “normal” temperature numbers can vary, but generally, keep an eye out for a temperature of 100.5 degrees Fahrenheit or higher. If you don’t have a thermometer (they can be pricey these days), there are other ways to figure out if you have a fever, or are at risk of Covid-19 complications.The C.D.C. has recommended that all Americans wear cloth masks if they go out in public. This is a shift in federal guidance reflecting new concerns that the coronavirus is being spread by infected people who have no symptoms. Until now, the C.D.C., like the W.H.O., has advised that ordinary people don’t need to wear masks unless they are sick and coughing. Part of the reason was to preserve medical-grade masks for health care workers who desperately need them at a time when they are in continuously short supply. Masks don’t replace hand washing and social distancing.If you’ve been exposed to the coronavirus or think you have, and have a fever or symptoms like a cough or difficulty breathing, call a doctor. They should give you advice on whether you should be tested, how to get tested, and how to seek medical treatment without potentially infecting or exposing others.If you’re sick and you think you’ve been exposed to the new coronavirus, the C.D.C. recommends that you call your healthcare provider and explain your symptoms and fears. They will decide if you need to be tested. Keep in mind that there’s a chance — because of a lack of testing kits or because you’re asymptomatic, for instance — you won’t be able to get tested.Charity Navigator, which evaluates charities using a numbers-based system, has a running list of nonprofits working in communities affected by the outbreak. You can give blood through the American Red Cross, and World Central Kitchen has stepped in to distribute meals in major cities.Ridership is down more than 90 percent, largely because only essential workers are supposed to be taking it now. But it is also because many people fear contracting the coronavirus on the transit system, even though subways and buses are being disinfected every day.A sudden surge of riders would make it hard, if not impossible, to maintain social distancing, a fact underscored on Thursday when the federal Centers for Disease Control and Prevention urged commuters nationwide who return to their jobs not to take mass transit.Mr. de Blasio this week said that he understood that many would feel uncomfortable returning to mass transit and that some would walk or bike, while others would drive or take cabs. But he offered little further guidance.Gov. Ned Lamont of Connecticut announced that the state would begin to allow gatherings of up to 10 people indoors and 25 people outdoors, easing restrictions that had previously prohibited gatherings larger than five people. At a briefing on Friday, Mr. Lamont also said that houses of worship would be allowed to hold indoor gatherings at 25 percent capacity or up to 100 people, whichever is fewer; outdoor services could include up to 150 people as long as social distancing was observed, he said.And Mr. Lamont conceded defeat in his discussions with casinos on land held by sovereign nations, saying that they would move forward with their plans to restart on June 1, with some operations resuming as early as Saturday.Mr. Lamont has vocally opposed reopening casinos at this time and has been in talks with tribal leadership about the issue for weeks. He said Friday that casino operators had agreed to not allow out-of-state residents to stay at their hotels initially, to require face coverings for visitors, and to only allow outdoor dining. Still, Mr. Lamont issued a warning for would-be gamblers: “This is a risk you’re taking,” he said.As The New York Times follows the spread of the coronavirus across New York, New Jersey and Connecticut, we need your help. We want to talk to doctors, nurses, lab technicians, respiratory therapists, emergency services workers, nursing home managers — anyone who can share what’s happening in the region’s hospitals and other health care centers.A reporter or editor may contact you. Your information will not be published without your consent.Reporting was contributed by Kimiko de Freytas-Tamura, Christina Goldbaum, Jesse McKinley, Andy Newman, Azi Paybarah, Luis Ferré Sadurní, Andrea Salcedo, Matt Stevens and Katie Van Syckle.Advertisement