https://www.nytimes.com/article/coronavirus-how-to-help-donations-charities.html
How to Help Victims of the Coronavirus Pandemic - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
179
AdvertisementSupported byFrom charities that support children to organizations that feed families, there is no shortage of ways to get involved.By Derrick Bryson Taylor and Mariel PadillaThe coronavirus has now spread to at least 177 countries and killed tens of thousands.Some countries and regions have been hit harder than others. Daily life has come to a virtual halt, the global economy is facing its worst downturn since the Great Depression and medical facilities continue to face a shortage of crucial supplies.Many charities and organizations are helping those affected by the pandemic. Here is what you can do to support them.Charity Navigator, which evaluates charities using a numbers-based system, has a running list of nonprofits working in communities affected by the outbreak. There are organizations that focus on medical services, relief supplies and more.GlobalGiving is a large global crowdfunding community that connects nonprofits, donors and companies. It has set a goal of reaching $5 million in donations. Money received will go toward sending emergency medical workers to communities in need, providing medical supplies to hospitals and helping deliver essentials to families.GoFundMe created a Covid-19 Relief Fund, which has raised more than $290,000 to support people affected by the coronavirus and to help find a cure. From March 20 to March 24, the number of coronavirus-related campaigns on GoFundMe shot up by 60 percent. More than 35,000 campaigns have raised more than $120 million worldwide, the crowdfunding site said.The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund, which has raised more than $300 million since its inception more than a century ago, has begun a Covid-19 Relief Campaign. All proceeds will go to four nonprofit organizations that provide assistance to those facing economic hardship: Feeding America, First Book, New York Community Trust and World Central Kitchen. Relief International, which operates in 16 countries throughout Africa, the Middle East and Asia, has focused some of its efforts on helping Iran, where more than 84,000 infections and at least 5,200 deaths have been reported.The group has so far provided 40,000 kits to test for the coronavirus and more than 60,000 pieces of medical protective gear, including 35,000 masks, 5,000 pairs of goggles, 25,000 pairs of latex gloves, 1,250 liters of hand sanitizer and 14,500 full-body protective suits. Eighty-five percent of all donated funds go directly to its programs.Heart to Heart International is distributing urgently needed equipment and medication to its partners around the world. Medical supplies are also being delivered to providers on the front lines.The International Medical Corps has been working with local and national health officials in more than 30 countries to provide expertise, equipment, training and triage and treatment services. Americares is providing personal protective equipment and training to health care workers on the front lines of the outbreak. More than 34 tons of protective supplies, including 1.4 million protective masks, have already been delivered to facilities in 40 states. Those seeking to give something other than money can look to the American Red Cross. There is a severe blood shortage because of a high number of blood drive cancellations during the outbreak, it said. Healthy donors are urged to give blood, platelets or AB plasma. The American Association of Blood Banks has a tool on its website to help eligible donors find nearby blood donation sites. Patients who have recovered from Covid-19 can donate convalescent plasma, which is rich in antibodies and may help patients who are currently fighting the infection. America’s Blood Centers, the largest network of nonprofit blood centers in North America, also provides information and resources related to blood donation.World Central Kitchen has stepped in to distribute meals to children and others in New York City, Washington, D.C., and Little Rock, Ark., after many schools closed. Since March 23, it has been giving food to families in Los Angeles, where schools are also closed.Feeding America is the nation’s largest domestic hunger-relief organization, with a network of 200 food banks and 60,000 food pantries across the country. Its Covid-19 Response fund is helping food banks across the country.Updated May 28, 2020States are reopening bit by bit. This means that more public spaces are available for use and more and more businesses are being allowed to open again. The federal government is largely leaving the decision up to states, and some state leaders are leaving the decision up to local authorities. Even if you aren’t being told to stay at home, it’s still a good idea to limit trips outside and your interaction with other people.Touching contaminated objects and then infecting ourselves with the germs is not typically how the virus spreads. But it can happen. A number of studies of flu, rhinovirus, coronavirus and other microbes have shown that respiratory illnesses, including the new coronavirus, can spread by touching contaminated surfaces, particularly in places like day care centers, offices and hospitals. But a long chain of events has to happen for the disease to spread that way. The best way to protect yourself from coronavirus — whether it’s surface transmission or close human contact — is still social distancing, washing your hands, not touching your face and wearing masks.Common symptoms include fever, a dry cough, fatigue and difficulty breathing or shortness of breath. Some of these symptoms overlap with those of the flu, making detection difficult, but runny noses and stuffy sinuses are less common. The C.D.C. has also added chills, muscle pain, sore throat, headache and a new loss of the sense of taste or smell as symptoms to look out for. Most people fall ill five to seven days after exposure, but symptoms may appear in as few as two days or as many as 14 days.If air travel is unavoidable, there are some steps you can take to protect yourself. Most important: Wash your hands often, and stop touching your face. If possible, choose a window seat. A study from Emory University found that during flu season, the safest place to sit on a plane is by a window, as people sitting in window seats had less contact with potentially sick people. Disinfect hard surfaces. When you get to your seat and your hands are clean, use disinfecting wipes to clean the hard surfaces at your seat like the head and arm rest, the seatbelt buckle, the remote, screen, seat back pocket and the tray table. If the seat is hard and nonporous or leather or pleather, you can wipe that down, too. (Using wipes on upholstered seats could lead to a wet seat and spreading of germs rather than killing them.)More than 40 million people — the equivalent of 1 in 4 U.S. workers — have filed for unemployment benefits since the pandemic took hold. One in five who were working in February reported losing a job or being furloughed in March or the beginning of April, data from a Federal Reserve survey released on May 14 showed, and that pain was highly concentrated among low earners. Fully 39 percent of former workers living in a household earning $40,000 or less lost work, compared with 13 percent in those making more than $100,000, a Fed official said.There is an uptick in people reporting symptoms of chilblains, which are painful red or purple lesions that typically appear in the winter on fingers or toes. The lesions are emerging as yet another symptom of infection with the new coronavirus. Chilblains are caused by inflammation in small blood vessels in reaction to cold or damp conditions, but they are usually common in the coldest winter months. Federal health officials do not include toe lesions in the list of coronavirus symptoms, but some dermatologists are pushing for a change, saying so-called Covid toe should be sufficient grounds for testing.Yes, but make sure you keep six feet of distance between you and people who don’t live in your home. Even if you just hang out in a park, rather than go for a jog or a walk, getting some fresh air, and hopefully sunshine, is a good idea.Taking one’s temperature to look for signs of fever is not as easy as it sounds, as “normal” temperature numbers can vary, but generally, keep an eye out for a temperature of 100.5 degrees Fahrenheit or higher. If you don’t have a thermometer (they can be pricey these days), there are other ways to figure out if you have a fever, or are at risk of Covid-19 complications.The C.D.C. has recommended that all Americans wear cloth masks if they go out in public. This is a shift in federal guidance reflecting new concerns that the coronavirus is being spread by infected people who have no symptoms. Until now, the C.D.C., like the W.H.O., has advised that ordinary people don’t need to wear masks unless they are sick and coughing. Part of the reason was to preserve medical-grade masks for health care workers who desperately need them at a time when they are in continuously short supply. Masks don’t replace hand washing and social distancing.If you’ve been exposed to the coronavirus or think you have, and have a fever or symptoms like a cough or difficulty breathing, call a doctor. They should give you advice on whether you should be tested, how to get tested, and how to seek medical treatment without potentially infecting or exposing others.If you’re sick and you think you’ve been exposed to the new coronavirus, the C.D.C. recommends that you call your healthcare provider and explain your symptoms and fears. They will decide if you need to be tested. Keep in mind that there’s a chance — because of a lack of testing kits or because you’re asymptomatic, for instance — you won’t be able to get tested.Charity Navigator, which evaluates charities using a numbers-based system, has a running list of nonprofits working in communities affected by the outbreak. You can give blood through the American Red Cross, and World Central Kitchen has stepped in to distribute meals in major cities.UNICEF is providing hygiene and medical kits to schools and health clinics.Save the Children has partnered with No Kid Hungry to make sure schools and community programs have the support they need to keep children fed during the pandemic.First Book has the goal of delivering eight million books to children in the United States who do not have internet access or home libraries so they can continue learning while schools are closed.Humanity & Inclusion, which works with the local authorities in more than 55 countries, has helped more than 2.1 million people during natural and civil disasters. Now it has new projects to protect refugees, older adults and those with disabilities as they grapple with the virus. The Salvation Army is helping low-wage employees who are facing layoffs, limited hours and child care challenges. The Salvation Army provides shelter to the homeless, feeds children who typically rely on school meals, and offers assistance with rent and mortgage payments. Oxfam America, which operates in 65 countries, focuses on assisting refugees where social distancing is virtually impossible and access to clean water, soap and medical facilities is limited. Free Wheelchair Mission is providing health care workers in developing countries with essential medical supplies to care for children and adults with disabilities, including wheelchairs, walkers and canes.Advertisement