http://www.nytimes.com/2016/07/11/us/police-and-protesters-clash-in-minnesota-capital.html
Police and Protesters Clash in Minnesota Capital - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
113
AdvertisementSupported bytranscriptNABy Mitch SmithST. PAUL — Police officers in riot gear clashed with protesters who blocked a major highway here for hours on Saturday night, marking a tense turn for the demonstrations that have continued almost nonstop since a black man, Philando Castile, was fatally shot by a suburban police officer during a traffic stop on Wednesday.The protesters marched from the Minnesota governor’s mansion onto Interstate 94, chanting refrains such as “We’re peaceful, y’all violent” as the police urged them to leave. Officers struggled for more than four hours to disperse the crowd, at times deploying smoke and marking rounds in a standoff that stretched into early Sunday before snowplows cleared debris and the highway was reopened to traffic.BREAKING: Protestors on I-94 now throwing fireworks at police. pic.twitter.com/RffGiOCKtnThe police in St. Paul said at least five officers were injured by fireworks, rocks, bricks and glass bottles that they said were thrown by protesters. None of their injuries were believed to be serious. Officers said they made arrests, but did not provide information about the number of people in custody or the charges they might be facing.The Minnesota protest was among several sizable demonstrations across the country on Saturday expressing outrage at the deaths of Mr. Castile and of Alton Sterling, another black man, who was killed by the police in Baton Rouge, La.DeRay Mckesson, a well-known activist with a large Twitter following, was among more than 30 people arrested on Saturday outside the Baton Rouge Police Headquarters. A live stream via Twitter’s Periscope service captured his arrest after a verbal confrontation with an officer who ordered him not to walk onto a street.Protesters also blocked traffic on Saturday in New York, the local NBC station reported, and The Chicago Tribune said that a series of demonstrations in that city turned tense at times and led to arrests.In Minnesota, the contentious highway shutdown marked a change in tack for the protesters who had occupied the area outside the governor’s mansion for days but had remained almost entirely peaceful. On Friday night, the protest group had been stationary for the most part, listening to music and taking turns at the microphone outside the governor’s residence discussing state laws and calling for changes to police tactics.transcriptNAEarlier on Saturday, a separate group of peaceful protesters had gathered at a park in downtown Minneapolis and prepared to walk through the streets. Nekima Levy-Pounds, president of the Minneapolis NAACP, said organizers scheduled that march because “people are experiencing trauma after trauma after trauma as a result of what happened.”Ms. Levy-Pounds said many African-Americans here had still been coming to terms with the fatal shooting of Jamar Clark by the Minneapolis police in 2015 and the decision not to charge the officers involved. Protesters also blocked traffic on a Minnesota highway after Mr. Clark’s death, and after the fatal shooting of Michael Brown by a Missouri police officer in 2014.As protests continue here, much remains unknown about Mr. Castile’s death. The Minnesota Bureau of Criminal Apprehension, which is investigating, has not said why he was pulled over or what happened during the traffic stop. A Facebook Live video of the shooting’s aftermath prompted widespread attention and outrage, with Mr. Castile’s girlfriend suggesting that he had been reaching for his identification when shot by Officer Jeronimo Yanez of the St. Anthony Police.Thomas Kelly, a lawyer for Officer Yanez, said his client had been “reacting to the presence of a gun,” though Mr. Castile’s girlfriend said in the Facebook video that he was licensed to carry a weapon.Advertisement