https://www.nytimes.com/2020/04/06/smarter-living/coronavirus-how-to-help-doctors-nurses.html
How to Help the Helpers - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
274
AdvertisementSupported byThe coronavirus pandemic has pushed medical professionals into the front lines of danger. Here’s what you can do to help, safely.By Nancy WartikLynne Hewett, a Utah nurse, flew into New York City a couple of weeks ago, to work the front lines of the coronavirus pandemic. She was an emergency room nurse in New York, after 9/11 and Superstorm Sandy. She was in Haiti after the earthquake.Now, she’s in a Manhattan hospital’s emergency room, treating an onslaught of New Yorkers who have coronavirus, or worry that they do. She’s never seen anything like it.“It’s overwhelming,” Ms. Hewett said. “These are really, really sick patients coming in, needing 10 or 11 people to work on them. These patients are coding” — or going into cardiac arrest. “There’s not enough staff to have a break and regroup; it’s nonstop. You’re trying to do one person, then you turn around and hear, ‘You’ve got another code next door.’”For many medical providers, such stress is the new norm. They’re coping with, or prepping for, crowds of sick or anxious patients and inadequate stores of personal protective equipment (P.P.E.). On the job, they expose themselves and by proxy their families, to a frightening disease. They’ve watched colleagues sicken or die from it.Health care professionals are the helpers we turn to in times of need. Now that they’re under siege, they need our help as well. Here are some ways to help.Follow the RulesIt’s the No. 1 plea of all health care providers and emergency workers: Maintain social distance if you go out. Otherwise stay home!“It makes us all nuts,” said Dr. R. Sean Morrison, a geriatric and palliative care specialist at Mount Sinai Hospital in New York. “I walk to work through Central Park. There are still people talking in groups, playing frisbee, standing together. They are vectors who could cause premature death.”Also, take a breath before seeking in-person help. If you feel sick, don’t start with an overflowing emergency room or the strained 911 system. Try this coronavirus self-checker from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Contact your family physician or a nearby urgent care clinic. In many cases, you can make an appointment via telemedicine, a technology that’s caught on rapidly since the pandemic began. If you’re healthy, you’ve lowered your own exposure risk. If you have a mild case, you’ve decreased others’ risk and can self-treat at home.Brian Hildebrand, a Staten Island paramedic, said a lot of his job now involves responding to people who are panicky, not ill.“Don’t let fear dictate your actions,” Mr. Hildebrand advised. “Reach out before reacting. Call up your doctor, say this is what I’m feeling, what do you think? That ultimately is going to help us do our jobs much better.”Help Procure Drastically Needed P.P.E.The virus has exposed this country’s extreme shortage of masks, gowns and similar protection. Some providers have taken the unprecedented step of begging on social media for this equipment.“We’re at war,” said Dr. David Fleeger, a colorectal surgeon in Austin and president of the Texas Medical Association. “We need the appropriate supplies. I can’t put my teams at risk to go into battle if they’re not well equipped. We’ve put pressure on the state, we’ve put pressure on the feds and we’re putting pressure on the community.”Donate to P.P.E. fund-raisers on sites like Fundly or GoFundMe. The latter offers guidance on starting your own campaign. Multiple organizations are also pitching in: the Center for Disaster Philanthropy has a Covid-19 response fund. So does Direct Relief. Or, if you operate a business that has masks that aren’t being used now, donate supplies directly.If you locate P.P.E., see if your local hospital or ambulance station wants it; call your county medical society or public health office. You can also contribute via sites like GetUsPPE, DonatePPE, Mask-Match or the broader PPE Coalition.Repurpose a Hobby or SkillLike to sew? A movement to make masks for hospital workers is in full swing. Cloth masks don’t meet N95 safety standards, but providers may use them if they’re all that’s available. There are a wide range of patterns online; see if a nearby hospital accepts homemade masks or connect with a group involved in distribution.People with a 3-D printing hobby are also stepping up, turning out masks and face shields based on open-source designs.Donate BloodThe Food and Drug Administration, desperate for donations, just relaxed some of its existing restrictions, so that more people can step up to give blood. The national supply has fallen precipitously, leaving already overburdened doctors worried not just about coronavirus but patient care across the board.To find a center, try the American Association of Blood Banks locator, visit the Red Cross website, or call 1-800-RED-CROSS. You can also find information through the America’s Blood Centers website.Contribute Food, but Be Sure It’s WantedSending treats or meals to exhausted, beleaguered front line workers has become increasingly popular.Amanda Bart, a juvenile justice mental health administrator at Bellevue Hospital in New York City, took advantage of a recent Doughnuttery offer to double the amount on orders for health care workers. She and her friends bought 200 mini doughnuts for a worn-out physician assistant friend in a hospital that’s been slammed by the virus; Doughnuttery delivered 400.“He and his colleagues were extremely appreciative,” Ms. Bart said in an email. “He sent a photo of them eating donuts, with thumbs ups and called to thank me again, and say he shared them with the staff working on each of the four COVID-19 units.”Providers in Westchester County, N.Y., were thrilled recently when more than 400 pizzas arrived, courtesy of local residents (named Hillary and Bill Clinton).Updated May 28, 2020States are reopening bit by bit. This means that more public spaces are available for use and more and more businesses are being allowed to open again. The federal government is largely leaving the decision up to states, and some state leaders are leaving the decision up to local authorities. Even if you aren’t being told to stay at home, it’s still a good idea to limit trips outside and your interaction with other people.Touching contaminated objects and then infecting ourselves with the germs is not typically how the virus spreads. But it can happen. A number of studies of flu, rhinovirus, coronavirus and other microbes have shown that respiratory illnesses, including the new coronavirus, can spread by touching contaminated surfaces, particularly in places like day care centers, offices and hospitals. But a long chain of events has to happen for the disease to spread that way. The best way to protect yourself from coronavirus — whether it’s surface transmission or close human contact — is still social distancing, washing your hands, not touching your face and wearing masks.Common symptoms include fever, a dry cough, fatigue and difficulty breathing or shortness of breath. Some of these symptoms overlap with those of the flu, making detection difficult, but runny noses and stuffy sinuses are less common. The C.D.C. has also added chills, muscle pain, sore throat, headache and a new loss of the sense of taste or smell as symptoms to look out for. Most people fall ill five to seven days after exposure, but symptoms may appear in as few as two days or as many as 14 days.If air travel is unavoidable, there are some steps you can take to protect yourself. Most important: Wash your hands often, and stop touching your face. If possible, choose a window seat. A study from Emory University found that during flu season, the safest place to sit on a plane is by a window, as people sitting in window seats had less contact with potentially sick people. Disinfect hard surfaces. When you get to your seat and your hands are clean, use disinfecting wipes to clean the hard surfaces at your seat like the head and arm rest, the seatbelt buckle, the remote, screen, seat back pocket and the tray table. If the seat is hard and nonporous or leather or pleather, you can wipe that down, too. (Using wipes on upholstered seats could lead to a wet seat and spreading of germs rather than killing them.)More than 40 million people — the equivalent of 1 in 4 U.S. workers — have filed for unemployment benefits since the pandemic took hold. One in five who were working in February reported losing a job or being furloughed in March or the beginning of April, data from a Federal Reserve survey released on May 14 showed, and that pain was highly concentrated among low earners. Fully 39 percent of former workers living in a household earning $40,000 or less lost work, compared with 13 percent in those making more than $100,000, a Fed official said.There is an uptick in people reporting symptoms of chilblains, which are painful red or purple lesions that typically appear in the winter on fingers or toes. The lesions are emerging as yet another symptom of infection with the new coronavirus. Chilblains are caused by inflammation in small blood vessels in reaction to cold or damp conditions, but they are usually common in the coldest winter months. Federal health officials do not include toe lesions in the list of coronavirus symptoms, but some dermatologists are pushing for a change, saying so-called Covid toe should be sufficient grounds for testing.Yes, but make sure you keep six feet of distance between you and people who don’t live in your home. Even if you just hang out in a park, rather than go for a jog or a walk, getting some fresh air, and hopefully sunshine, is a good idea.Taking one’s temperature to look for signs of fever is not as easy as it sounds, as “normal” temperature numbers can vary, but generally, keep an eye out for a temperature of 100.5 degrees Fahrenheit or higher. If you don’t have a thermometer (they can be pricey these days), there are other ways to figure out if you have a fever, or are at risk of Covid-19 complications.The C.D.C. has recommended that all Americans wear cloth masks if they go out in public. This is a shift in federal guidance reflecting new concerns that the coronavirus is being spread by infected people who have no symptoms. Until now, the C.D.C., like the W.H.O., has advised that ordinary people don’t need to wear masks unless they are sick and coughing. Part of the reason was to preserve medical-grade masks for health care workers who desperately need them at a time when they are in continuously short supply. Masks don’t replace hand washing and social distancing.If you’ve been exposed to the coronavirus or think you have, and have a fever or symptoms like a cough or difficulty breathing, call a doctor. They should give you advice on whether you should be tested, how to get tested, and how to seek medical treatment without potentially infecting or exposing others.If you’re sick and you think you’ve been exposed to the new coronavirus, the C.D.C. recommends that you call your healthcare provider and explain your symptoms and fears. They will decide if you need to be tested. Keep in mind that there’s a chance — because of a lack of testing kits or because you’re asymptomatic, for instance — you won’t be able to get tested.Charity Navigator, which evaluates charities using a numbers-based system, has a running list of nonprofits working in communities affected by the outbreak. You can give blood through the American Red Cross, and World Central Kitchen has stepped in to distribute meals in major cities.But not all frontliners want food delivered. Firehouses, for instance, have mostly closed their doors to the public.“If someone brings us pizza or cookies, they could have coughed on the surface of the box they came in,” said Greg Morgan, an emergency medical technician in Northern Virginia. “We’re better off not taking the chance of being infected. If one of us gets sick, it could wipe out an entire shift. I’d rather have distance for now.”So check before assuming your donation is welcome.Offer Responders a Place to StayAirbnb, the worldwide home-sharing service, has mobilized in the wake of disasters like the Australian forest fires or Hurricane Maria in Puerto Rico. Now, through its hosting network, the company has met its goal of being able to offer 100,000 lodgings around the world to healthcare professionals flying into hard-hit cities, or to those who want to be near a hospital where they’re practicing. They will be made available at either free or discounted rates. If you have an unoccupied living space, learn more here about offering it to a frontline responder.Personally Lighten a Friend’s LoadYour college friend now works as an imaging tech. She’s exhausted. Let her vent.“Pick up the phone, make that meaningful connection,” said Dr. Sandeep Sachdeva, chief medical officer at Swedish Edmonds and Mill Creek, outside Seattle. “Say, ‘I’ve been wondering how you’re doing’ and really mean it. It’s the deepest, simplest thing you can do. These folks are getting up every morning and putting themselves in harm’s way, running towards the fire when everyone else is running away.”Say Thank You Small or BigThe man showed up outside the window of the Morristown Medical Center in New Jersey. Tears streaming, he held up a sign: “Thank you all in emergency for saving my wife’s life/ I love you all.” A nurse, crying herself, snapped a soon-to-be-viral photo.“It was such a morale booster for our staff,” said Trish O’Keefe, the medical center’s president. “It still is. It’s a symbolic reminder of why we’re all here,”Staff members at hospitals in New Orleans came to work one day to find large signs had been erected overnight, saying, “Heroes work here.”And organized clapping sessions to show love and appreciation to health care workers are trending at #clapbecausewecare, in communities across the world.“I walk to work in scrubs,” noted Ms. Hewett, the nurse working in the Bronx. “I’ve heard it, I don’t know how many times, people tell me, ‘Thank you, thank you.’ It’s so cool, it’s just lovely. It justifies what I do.”Advertisement