https://www.nytimes.com/2020/03/12/nyregion/nyc-coronavirus-help-volunteer.html
Coronavirus in New York: How to Help - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
280
AdvertisementSupported byWhat to do for others during a crisis, from checking on neighbors to donating blood.By Azi Paybarah[Read our latest coverage of the coronavirus outbreak in the New York area.]If there is one thing New Yorkers believe about themselves, it’s that no one pulls together quite as well during a crisis.Vigorous hand-washing, staying home, bumping elbows instead of hugging — we got that. But with more than 200 confirmed cases of coronavirus in New York and more than 1,110 nationwide, some people are asking if they can do more to help.“It’s been so internally focused,” Chris Principe, 40, said of the advice he has heard from public officials. Mr. Principe, who lives in Brooklyn and is a video director at the publishing company Condé Nast, said he assumed there would be ways for people to assist others.That has been a common question, said Kathryn S. Wylde, president and chief executive of the Partnership for New York City, an association of major businesses in New York. But large-scale efforts have been hampered in part by safety concerns. The number of cases has increased, even as the capacity to test for the virus has remained limited, prompting concerns about accidental exposure.“Because of the fear of social contact, nobody fully knows who has it and who doesn’t it,” she said.Still, there are some options for people who are feeling both healthy and altruistic. The Times spoke with several organizations about how best to help.Older people seem to be particularly susceptible to contracting the coronavirus, according to health officials. Some are staying at home and, as a precaution, may not open their doors to visitors.One way to check on homebound older residents without jeopardizing their health is to call or send a text, said Eric. S. Goldstein, the chief executive officer of the UJA-Federation of New York, which provides food, health care and other services to people in need.If telephone calls and texts are not an option, “talk through the door,” Mr. Goldstein said. Because some people may recoil at the suggestion that they are not self-sufficient, Mr. Goldstein suggested offering to help in a low-key way, such as saying, “I’m running to the market, can I get you anything?”Last week, the UJA-Federation of New York canceled a dinner gala in Westchester hours before it was to take place. The food had already been paid for, so the organization asked its caterer if it could be boxed up and delivered to people quarantined in Westchester, where many of New York’s cases are linked. The caterer agreed.The food was delivered via a method that could be described as a ding-dong-dash. Recipients were notified in advance that a delivery was on its way. Volunteers walked up to the door, rang the bell and left a bag of the packaged food on the door handle or porch.Then, the delivery volunteer left before the recipient opened the door.A spokeswoman for the Red Cross, which provides disaster relief and other services, said there was a need for blood donations.As the number of confirmed coronavirus cases grows, the number of people eligible to give blood decreases, said Greta Gustafson, a spokeswoman for the organization.More than 125 Red Cross blood drives nationwide have been canceled as of March 10 over coronavirus concerns, and that number is expected to increase, she said.Updated May 28, 2020States are reopening bit by bit. This means that more public spaces are available for use and more and more businesses are being allowed to open again. The federal government is largely leaving the decision up to states, and some state leaders are leaving the decision up to local authorities. Even if you aren’t being told to stay at home, it’s still a good idea to limit trips outside and your interaction with other people.Touching contaminated objects and then infecting ourselves with the germs is not typically how the virus spreads. But it can happen. A number of studies of flu, rhinovirus, coronavirus and other microbes have shown that respiratory illnesses, including the new coronavirus, can spread by touching contaminated surfaces, particularly in places like day care centers, offices and hospitals. But a long chain of events has to happen for the disease to spread that way. The best way to protect yourself from coronavirus — whether it’s surface transmission or close human contact — is still social distancing, washing your hands, not touching your face and wearing masks.Common symptoms include fever, a dry cough, fatigue and difficulty breathing or shortness of breath. Some of these symptoms overlap with those of the flu, making detection difficult, but runny noses and stuffy sinuses are less common. The C.D.C. has also added chills, muscle pain, sore throat, headache and a new loss of the sense of taste or smell as symptoms to look out for. Most people fall ill five to seven days after exposure, but symptoms may appear in as few as two days or as many as 14 days.If air travel is unavoidable, there are some steps you can take to protect yourself. Most important: Wash your hands often, and stop touching your face. If possible, choose a window seat. A study from Emory University found that during flu season, the safest place to sit on a plane is by a window, as people sitting in window seats had less contact with potentially sick people. Disinfect hard surfaces. When you get to your seat and your hands are clean, use disinfecting wipes to clean the hard surfaces at your seat like the head and arm rest, the seatbelt buckle, the remote, screen, seat back pocket and the tray table. If the seat is hard and nonporous or leather or pleather, you can wipe that down, too. (Using wipes on upholstered seats could lead to a wet seat and spreading of germs rather than killing them.)More than 40 million people — the equivalent of 1 in 4 U.S. workers — have filed for unemployment benefits since the pandemic took hold. One in five who were working in February reported losing a job or being furloughed in March or the beginning of April, data from a Federal Reserve survey released on May 14 showed, and that pain was highly concentrated among low earners. Fully 39 percent of former workers living in a household earning $40,000 or less lost work, compared with 13 percent in those making more than $100,000, a Fed official said.There is an uptick in people reporting symptoms of chilblains, which are painful red or purple lesions that typically appear in the winter on fingers or toes. The lesions are emerging as yet another symptom of infection with the new coronavirus. Chilblains are caused by inflammation in small blood vessels in reaction to cold or damp conditions, but they are usually common in the coldest winter months. Federal health officials do not include toe lesions in the list of coronavirus symptoms, but some dermatologists are pushing for a change, saying so-called Covid toe should be sufficient grounds for testing.Yes, but make sure you keep six feet of distance between you and people who don’t live in your home. Even if you just hang out in a park, rather than go for a jog or a walk, getting some fresh air, and hopefully sunshine, is a good idea.Taking one’s temperature to look for signs of fever is not as easy as it sounds, as “normal” temperature numbers can vary, but generally, keep an eye out for a temperature of 100.5 degrees Fahrenheit or higher. If you don’t have a thermometer (they can be pricey these days), there are other ways to figure out if you have a fever, or are at risk of Covid-19 complications.The C.D.C. has recommended that all Americans wear cloth masks if they go out in public. This is a shift in federal guidance reflecting new concerns that the coronavirus is being spread by infected people who have no symptoms. Until now, the C.D.C., like the W.H.O., has advised that ordinary people don’t need to wear masks unless they are sick and coughing. Part of the reason was to preserve medical-grade masks for health care workers who desperately need them at a time when they are in continuously short supply. Masks don’t replace hand washing and social distancing.If you’ve been exposed to the coronavirus or think you have, and have a fever or symptoms like a cough or difficulty breathing, call a doctor. They should give you advice on whether you should be tested, how to get tested, and how to seek medical treatment without potentially infecting or exposing others.If you’re sick and you think you’ve been exposed to the new coronavirus, the C.D.C. recommends that you call your healthcare provider and explain your symptoms and fears. They will decide if you need to be tested. Keep in mind that there’s a chance — because of a lack of testing kits or because you’re asymptomatic, for instance — you won’t be able to get tested.Charity Navigator, which evaluates charities using a numbers-based system, has a running list of nonprofits working in communities affected by the outbreak. You can give blood through the American Red Cross, and World Central Kitchen has stepped in to distribute meals in major cities.Lots of organizations, such as food banks and social services groups, offer direct help for people in need and may be one of the first places people turn if they are hurt economically by the virus. Organizations offer help without regard to people’s religious affiliations.[The New York Times is keeping an updated list of the school closings in the New York area here.]“One of the things we’re doing is trying to, as much as possible, is maintain the services we do ordinarily,” Msgr. Kevin Sullivan, executive director of Catholic Charities of New York said.Kristina Reintamm, a spokeswoman for Brooklyn Community Services, a nonprofit serving low-income residents, said in addition to donating, people could offer a simple “word of encouragement” to front-line social workers who do not have the option of working from home.The Hebrew Free Loan Society typically provides interest-free loans of up to $7,500 to low-income people who have two guarantors and reside in New York City, Long Island or Westchester. This week, in response to the virus, the organization modified its application process: Interest-free loans of up to $5,000 are now available to people in those areas with only one guarantor needed.Rabbi David Rosenn, executive director of the organization, said donations made to the organization are used as capital to make a loan. Once the loan is repaid, the capital is given out as a new loan.Another nonprofit organization, RIP Medical Debt, based in Rye, N.Y., buys medical debt at a discount and then forgives the loans. During a crisis like the coronavirus, people “might work up until their condition becomes critical and they need to go to an E.R.,” said Daniel Lempert, a spokesman for the group.Advertisement