https://www.nytimes.com/2020/03/13/business/europe-germany-coronavirus.html
Europe Pledges Billions in Economic Aid in Rare Sign of Unity - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
347
AdvertisementSupported byAnnouncements from government leaders contrast with the bickering that characterized Europe’s response to the financial crisis a decade ago.By Jack Ewing, Melissa Eddy and Liz AldermanIn an unusual show of unity and resolve, European leaders said they would spend hundreds of billions of euros to prevent the coronavirus outbreak from provoking a deep recession or financial crisis.Nearly simultaneous announcements by leaders in Berlin, Brussels, Paris and other capitals contrasted with the bickering and finger-pointing that characterized Europe’s response to the financial crisis a decade ago, which left economic scars that have still not fully healed.The economic toll of the coronavirus outbreak continues to rise. The French carmaker Renault and Volkswagen’s SEAT unit said Friday that they would close plants in Spain next week because of parts shortages.Germany, in a remarkable turnaround, dropped its insistence on balanced budgets Friday and said it would offer as much credit as businesses needed to stay afloat. France promised to compensate citizens for lost wages. Italy was expected to introduce a multibillion-euro economic aid package.And the European Union said it would allow members to run bigger budget deficits than normally allowed.“We will do whatever is necessary to support the Europeans and the European economy,” said Ursula von der Leyen, the president of the European Commission, the bloc’s executive arm. She said the commission would allocate 37 billion euros, or $41 billion, to fight the health and economic consequences of the coronavirus.But the sums committed by national leaders were for their own countries. It is still an open question how far other European countries will be willing to go to help Italy, which has been hit hardest by the virus but has limited resources to respond because of a weak economy and enormous debt load.Other leaders have signaled they are willing to activate the European Union’s escape clauses that would allow Italy to exceed the usual limits on deficit spending. But they stopped short of offering direct aid.That means Italy’s crisis spending could push its debt to even more unsustainable heights, potentially creating a financial crisis.“It is not enough to save German businesses and at the same time send Italian companies into bankruptcy,” said Sven Giegold, a member of the European Parliament who speaks for the Greens party on economic policy. The German proposals, Mr. Giegold said in a statement, “do not provide an answer to the dilemma of weaker euro countries which are at risk of losing the confidence of markets due to rising debt.”Mr. Giegold, who is German, and others have called for Europe to create a common debt repayment fund, but that remains a politically sensitive topic in Germany and other northern European countries. At least until recently, Germans, Dutch and others have balked at providing debt relief to countries, like Italy, that they regard as spendthrift and undisciplined.But this crisis is caused by an act of nature that has struck at least 113 countries rather than irresponsible policies, and views may be changing.“The economic downturn will lead to rising deficits, but given current low levels of interest rates this can be handled,” said Clemens Fuest, president of the Ifo Institute in Munich, which leans conservative on fiscal matters. If investors lose faith in Italy’s solvency, Mr. Fuest said in an email, it could resort to a European fund that was created during the last crisis to help countries in financial distress.The expressions of resolve in capitals around the Continent on Friday, which appeared to be coordinated for maximum impact, showed that European leaders were capable of acting in concert in an emergency. A day earlier, stock markets, spooked by economic paralysis caused by the virus, had their worst day in more than 30 years.“We are in a situation which is exceptional in every respect,” Angela Merkel, the German chancellor, told reporters late Thursday, “more exceptional than at the time of the banking crisis, I would say.”Earlier, European countries had sometimes been acting with little regard for one another’s needs. Last week, France, Germany and other countries imposed limits on exports of masks and other protective equipment that is in short supply.But they have since agreed to cooperate on allocating the supplies within Europe, Valdis Dombrovskis, a member of the European Commission, told reporters Friday.Other countries, including Spain, Portugal, the Netherlands and Denmark, also announced measures in recent days to prevent the virus from infecting their economies, including deferred tax payments, emergency loans and paid job furloughs. Outside the eurozone, Britain introduced a budget on Wednesday with 30 billion pounds (about $38.7 billion) to help businesses and workers hurt by the virus.The resolve among European nations was not a given. On Thursday, Christine Lagarde, the president of the European Central Bank, had said she worried about “the complacency and slow-motion process that would be demonstrated by the fiscal authorities of the euro area in particular.”After the central bank announced measures on Thursday intended to ensure that businesses and consumers could still get credit, Ms. Lagarde called on European leaders to do their part.The central bank’s action initially left investors cold. But it seemed to acquire more punch after political leaders followed with their own measures. Major indexes in Frankfurt, London and Paris rose 4 percent or more in afternoon trading on Friday, though they later gave up much of the gains.Notably, German leaders put aside an obsession with balanced budgets and imposed no ceiling on emergency loans to businesses offered by KfW, a state-owned development bank.“There will be no upper limits for the amount of credit that the KfW can give out,” Peter Altmaier, the minister of the economy, said at a news conference in Berlin. “This is the time for working together.”Olaf Scholz, Germany’s finance minister, told reporters that the government was willing to go further if necessary, even taking stakes in stricken companies. “We can’t forget the lessons of the previous financial crisis,” Mr. Scholz told reporters in Berlin.Updated May 28, 2020States are reopening bit by bit. This means that more public spaces are available for use and more and more businesses are being allowed to open again. The federal government is largely leaving the decision up to states, and some state leaders are leaving the decision up to local authorities. Even if you aren’t being told to stay at home, it’s still a good idea to limit trips outside and your interaction with other people.Touching contaminated objects and then infecting ourselves with the germs is not typically how the virus spreads. But it can happen. A number of studies of flu, rhinovirus, coronavirus and other microbes have shown that respiratory illnesses, including the new coronavirus, can spread by touching contaminated surfaces, particularly in places like day care centers, offices and hospitals. But a long chain of events has to happen for the disease to spread that way. The best way to protect yourself from coronavirus — whether it’s surface transmission or close human contact — is still social distancing, washing your hands, not touching your face and wearing masks.Common symptoms include fever, a dry cough, fatigue and difficulty breathing or shortness of breath. Some of these symptoms overlap with those of the flu, making detection difficult, but runny noses and stuffy sinuses are less common. The C.D.C. has also added chills, muscle pain, sore throat, headache and a new loss of the sense of taste or smell as symptoms to look out for. Most people fall ill five to seven days after exposure, but symptoms may appear in as few as two days or as many as 14 days.If air travel is unavoidable, there are some steps you can take to protect yourself. Most important: Wash your hands often, and stop touching your face. If possible, choose a window seat. A study from Emory University found that during flu season, the safest place to sit on a plane is by a window, as people sitting in window seats had less contact with potentially sick people. Disinfect hard surfaces. When you get to your seat and your hands are clean, use disinfecting wipes to clean the hard surfaces at your seat like the head and arm rest, the seatbelt buckle, the remote, screen, seat back pocket and the tray table. If the seat is hard and nonporous or leather or pleather, you can wipe that down, too. (Using wipes on upholstered seats could lead to a wet seat and spreading of germs rather than killing them.)More than 40 million people — the equivalent of 1 in 4 U.S. workers — have filed for unemployment benefits since the pandemic took hold. One in five who were working in February reported losing a job or being furloughed in March or the beginning of April, data from a Federal Reserve survey released on May 14 showed, and that pain was highly concentrated among low earners. Fully 39 percent of former workers living in a household earning $40,000 or less lost work, compared with 13 percent in those making more than $100,000, a Fed official said.There is an uptick in people reporting symptoms of chilblains, which are painful red or purple lesions that typically appear in the winter on fingers or toes. The lesions are emerging as yet another symptom of infection with the new coronavirus. Chilblains are caused by inflammation in small blood vessels in reaction to cold or damp conditions, but they are usually common in the coldest winter months. Federal health officials do not include toe lesions in the list of coronavirus symptoms, but some dermatologists are pushing for a change, saying so-called Covid toe should be sufficient grounds for testing.Yes, but make sure you keep six feet of distance between you and people who don’t live in your home. Even if you just hang out in a park, rather than go for a jog or a walk, getting some fresh air, and hopefully sunshine, is a good idea.Taking one’s temperature to look for signs of fever is not as easy as it sounds, as “normal” temperature numbers can vary, but generally, keep an eye out for a temperature of 100.5 degrees Fahrenheit or higher. If you don’t have a thermometer (they can be pricey these days), there are other ways to figure out if you have a fever, or are at risk of Covid-19 complications.The C.D.C. has recommended that all Americans wear cloth masks if they go out in public. This is a shift in federal guidance reflecting new concerns that the coronavirus is being spread by infected people who have no symptoms. Until now, the C.D.C., like the W.H.O., has advised that ordinary people don’t need to wear masks unless they are sick and coughing. Part of the reason was to preserve medical-grade masks for health care workers who desperately need them at a time when they are in continuously short supply. Masks don’t replace hand washing and social distancing.If you’ve been exposed to the coronavirus or think you have, and have a fever or symptoms like a cough or difficulty breathing, call a doctor. They should give you advice on whether you should be tested, how to get tested, and how to seek medical treatment without potentially infecting or exposing others.If you’re sick and you think you’ve been exposed to the new coronavirus, the C.D.C. recommends that you call your healthcare provider and explain your symptoms and fears. They will decide if you need to be tested. Keep in mind that there’s a chance — because of a lack of testing kits or because you’re asymptomatic, for instance — you won’t be able to get tested.Charity Navigator, which evaluates charities using a numbers-based system, has a running list of nonprofits working in communities affected by the outbreak. You can give blood through the American Red Cross, and World Central Kitchen has stepped in to distribute meals in major cities.Germany will also expand an existing program that covers some of the lost wages and benefits when companies reduce their employees’ working hours.France on Friday pledged to unleash tens of billions of euros to prevent a potential jump in unemployment by paying small and medium-size businesses slammed by the epidemic to keep workers on furlough.“Nobody with a job will lose a cent,” the country’s finance minister, Bruno Le Maire, said on BFM television Friday. The government may cap compensation given to companies for high-salaried workers, “but we will provide for 99 percent of employees” facing reduced salaries because of virus containment measures, he said.On Thursday night, President Emmanuel Macron addressed France in a televised speech in which he sought to reassure businesses facing cancellations, delays and a general decline in activity because of the virus.By aiming the measures at smaller firms, the authorities want to avoid the collapse of businesses that make up the backbone of the economy while Europe is staring at another potential recession.For Mr. Macron in particular, it is crucial to prevent mass layoffs and a rise in unemployment at a time when the nation has faced social unrest with so-called Yellow Vest demonstrations and nationwide strikes to protest his unpopular plan for a pension overhaul. Preserving jobs will be difficult as the coronavirus begins to force factories to close.On Friday, the French carmaker Renault said it would shut down two plants in Spain on Monday and Tuesday, and possibly longer, because a key supplier is in a quarantine zone and unable to deliver parts.In France, too, Renault is scrambling to keep factories open because some employees cannot go to work, and it may need to curtail production or even stop assembly lines at some locations, a spokeswoman said Friday.SEAT, a division of Volkswagen, said that starting Monday it would close an assembly plant in Martorell, Spain, that employs around 7,000 people.Many auto industry suppliers are in Italy, which is in lockdown. Brembo, a maker of high-performance brakes whose customers include Porsche, said Friday that it was suspending production at four Italian factories. If the supplier shutdowns continue, eventually their automaker customers in countries like Germany and France will be forced to stop production, too.Monika Pronczuk contributed reporting.Advertisement