https://www.nytimes.com/2020/05/14/business/economy/coronavirus-unemployment-claims.html
Unemployment Claims Above 36 Million in Coronavirus Pandemic - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
58
AdvertisementSupported byNearly three million new unemployment claims brought the two-month total to more than 36 million, even with some still frustrated in seeking benefits.By Patricia Cohen and Tiffany HsuScattershot reopenings of retail stores, nail salons and restaurants around the country have not halted the flood of layoffs, with the government reporting Thursday that nearly three million people filed unemployment claims last week, bringing the two-month tally to more than 36 million.The weekly count of new claims has been declining since late March, but that hopeful flicker barely stands out in an otherwise grim and chaotic economic landscape.“This is a very protracted, painful situation for the labor market,” said Rubeela Farooqi, chief U.S. economist at High Frequency Economics, “and I just don’t see anything positive.”In places where the fitful reopening has started, workers called back to their jobs often face reduced hours and paychecks as well as a heightened risk of infection. Declining to return, however, is likely to put an end to any jobless benefits.“It’s a very tough choice for those in the service industry and those at the lower end of the pay scale,” Ms. Farooqi said. “Do you go back and risk getting sick, or have no money coming in?”Lags in data make it hard to calculate just how many workers may have been rehired after the most recent shelter-in-place restrictions were lifted. And Connecticut cited an error in the government’s report that appeared to have inflated the state’s latest claims by more than 200,000.But Michelle Meyer, head of U.S. economics at Bank of America, said she doubted that callbacks to work outnumbered additional layoffs from other sectors. The slowdown has been rippling beyond the early shutdowns in retail and hospitality to professional business services, manufacturing and health care.“In a sense, it’s a rolling shock,” she said.Georgia, one of the first states to reopen, is an example. “The reopening is bringing people back to work, reducing the total amount of people receiving unemployment insurance,” Ms. Meyer noted. “But the number of initial jobless claims is still rising, which suggests there is still residual weakness in the economy.”In an analysis of the latest unemployment-claims report, the U.S. Chamber of Commerce found that in 11 states, more than a quarter of those in the work force in February were now unemployed. And a survey by the Federal Reserve found that in households making less than $40,000 a year, nearly 40 percent of those who were working in February lost their jobs in March or the beginning of April.For millions of Americans, government benefits have provided a crucial lifeline. Unemployment programs alone delivered $48 billion in payments in April, according to the Treasury Department.But even as states strive to keep up with the onslaught of claims, many workers remain supremely frustrated, either by their inability to submit applications or by payment delays. According to a poll for The New York Times in early May by the online research firm SurveyMonkey, more than half of those applying for unemployment benefits in recent weeks were unsuccessful.And as of Saturday, 20 states, the District of Columbia and Puerto Rico had not paid out any money under the Pandemic Unemployment Assistance program, which Congress passed in March to help freelancers, the self-employed and other workers not normally eligible for state jobless benefits.Some of those being called back to work have never seen a penny of government aid.Jason Cooper, 43, went back to his serving job at the Savour restaurant in Tallahassee, Fla., in early May without ever receiving the jobless benefits he spent weeks trying to track down.He was furloughed on March 14 and tried for the next month to file for government aid. In mid-April, a few days after he successfully submitted a claim, his employer secured a loan and began paying workers again.Mr. Cooper was lucky: he had some savings that helped cover four weeks without income, and he temporarily moved in with his mother in St. Augustine, Fla. He plans to wait out the pandemic before trying to go to a state office to claim the backdated benefits he believes he is owed.“It was so difficult to get through the first time that I have no real faith that the system is going to work anytime in the near future,” he said.At first, Mr. Cooper was concerned about returning to work, but now he feels comfortable in the small restaurant, where employees are not wearing masks but are using single-use gloves for serving. Tables have also been spaced farther apart. “It feels shockingly normal,” he said.Other workers who have been called back say they are scared of getting sick but feel they have no choice. Some states are taking a hard line. Nebraska posted a notice online declaring that failing to return to work “could be considered fraud” and potentially disqualify people from receiving benefits. In South Carolina, workers are not eligible for benefits if they don’t work because they are isolating themselves to avoid exposure to the virus or have to care for children while schools are closed. Iowa has an online form for “employers to report unemployed claimants who have refused legitimate job offers.”Sarah Parker, 26, a customer service manager at a store in Chillicothe, Ohio, was asked by her employer last week to prepare to return to work in a small shopping center.“On one side, I really love my job — it’s my favorite place to be,” she said. “On the other hand, I’m petrified. I’m afraid I’m going to put myself at way more risk working harder for less pay.”She estimates that her new paycheck will be half of the roughly $800 a week that she received in government aid, but said she did not want to subsist on benefit payments.After the pandemic grabbed hold in March, Washington began sending $1,200 stimulus checks to most households. Congress also enacted emergency benefits that expanded unemployment insurance to gig workers and others not covered under state programs, and provided a weekly supplement of $600 through July. To help laid-off workers who exhausted their state benefits, the government extended unemployment insurance for 13 weeks.For many low-wage workers who applied successfully, the additional $600 meant their weekly income matched or even exceeded their regular paycheck. Many would prefer to wait for the health risks to recede but fear losing their benefits.Updated May 28, 2020States are reopening bit by bit. This means that more public spaces are available for use and more and more businesses are being allowed to open again. The federal government is largely leaving the decision up to states, and some state leaders are leaving the decision up to local authorities. Even if you aren’t being told to stay at home, it’s still a good idea to limit trips outside and your interaction with other people.Touching contaminated objects and then infecting ourselves with the germs is not typically how the virus spreads. But it can happen. A number of studies of flu, rhinovirus, coronavirus and other microbes have shown that respiratory illnesses, including the new coronavirus, can spread by touching contaminated surfaces, particularly in places like day care centers, offices and hospitals. But a long chain of events has to happen for the disease to spread that way. The best way to protect yourself from coronavirus — whether it’s surface transmission or close human contact — is still social distancing, washing your hands, not touching your face and wearing masks.Common symptoms include fever, a dry cough, fatigue and difficulty breathing or shortness of breath. Some of these symptoms overlap with those of the flu, making detection difficult, but runny noses and stuffy sinuses are less common. The C.D.C. has also added chills, muscle pain, sore throat, headache and a new loss of the sense of taste or smell as symptoms to look out for. Most people fall ill five to seven days after exposure, but symptoms may appear in as few as two days or as many as 14 days.If air travel is unavoidable, there are some steps you can take to protect yourself. Most important: Wash your hands often, and stop touching your face. If possible, choose a window seat. A study from Emory University found that during flu season, the safest place to sit on a plane is by a window, as people sitting in window seats had less contact with potentially sick people. Disinfect hard surfaces. When you get to your seat and your hands are clean, use disinfecting wipes to clean the hard surfaces at your seat like the head and arm rest, the seatbelt buckle, the remote, screen, seat back pocket and the tray table. If the seat is hard and nonporous or leather or pleather, you can wipe that down, too. (Using wipes on upholstered seats could lead to a wet seat and spreading of germs rather than killing them.)More than 40 million people — the equivalent of 1 in 4 U.S. workers — have filed for unemployment benefits since the pandemic took hold. One in five who were working in February reported losing a job or being furloughed in March or the beginning of April, data from a Federal Reserve survey released on May 14 showed, and that pain was highly concentrated among low earners. Fully 39 percent of former workers living in a household earning $40,000 or less lost work, compared with 13 percent in those making more than $100,000, a Fed official said.There is an uptick in people reporting symptoms of chilblains, which are painful red or purple lesions that typically appear in the winter on fingers or toes. The lesions are emerging as yet another symptom of infection with the new coronavirus. Chilblains are caused by inflammation in small blood vessels in reaction to cold or damp conditions, but they are usually common in the coldest winter months. Federal health officials do not include toe lesions in the list of coronavirus symptoms, but some dermatologists are pushing for a change, saying so-called Covid toe should be sufficient grounds for testing.Yes, but make sure you keep six feet of distance between you and people who don’t live in your home. Even if you just hang out in a park, rather than go for a jog or a walk, getting some fresh air, and hopefully sunshine, is a good idea.Taking one’s temperature to look for signs of fever is not as easy as it sounds, as “normal” temperature numbers can vary, but generally, keep an eye out for a temperature of 100.5 degrees Fahrenheit or higher. If you don’t have a thermometer (they can be pricey these days), there are other ways to figure out if you have a fever, or are at risk of Covid-19 complications.The C.D.C. has recommended that all Americans wear cloth masks if they go out in public. This is a shift in federal guidance reflecting new concerns that the coronavirus is being spread by infected people who have no symptoms. Until now, the C.D.C., like the W.H.O., has advised that ordinary people don’t need to wear masks unless they are sick and coughing. Part of the reason was to preserve medical-grade masks for health care workers who desperately need them at a time when they are in continuously short supply. Masks don’t replace hand washing and social distancing.If you’ve been exposed to the coronavirus or think you have, and have a fever or symptoms like a cough or difficulty breathing, call a doctor. They should give you advice on whether you should be tested, how to get tested, and how to seek medical treatment without potentially infecting or exposing others.If you’re sick and you think you’ve been exposed to the new coronavirus, the C.D.C. recommends that you call your healthcare provider and explain your symptoms and fears. They will decide if you need to be tested. Keep in mind that there’s a chance — because of a lack of testing kits or because you’re asymptomatic, for instance — you won’t be able to get tested.Charity Navigator, which evaluates charities using a numbers-based system, has a running list of nonprofits working in communities affected by the outbreak. You can give blood through the American Red Cross, and World Central Kitchen has stepped in to distribute meals in major cities.Kelty Stanton, an 18-year-old community college student, said that she was happy to be asked to return to her job next week at a restaurant and grocery near Titusville, N.J., but that she was stunned when she read an email outlining the terms.To stay on as an employee, she was required to return a signed and dated copy of an attached letter or risk being fired. Her company said that if she declined to go back to work, New Jersey’s unemployment department would be notified and her benefits removed.The letter stressed that the company was committed to a safe and healthy workplace, with “frequent disinfection of surfaces, social distancing rules, reduced customer capacity, staggered shifts.”“I’m relieved that I have a job again,” Ms. Stanton said, “but at the same time, I also feel unsafe going back. I’m nervous and kind of anxious. But it’s not like they’re giving me much of a choice.”She said she planned to buy some masks and extra hand sanitizer before she starts on Monday.Some employers are asking returning workers to sign waivers absolving companies of liability if their workers get sick.A survey released last week by the National Federation of Independent Business, a trade group that has often supported lower taxes and deregulation, found that 68 percent of small-business owners were worried about increased liability claims if they reopened.This week, social media users shared a letter from the Las Vegas restaurant chain Nacho Daddy that asked returning employees to promise not to take legal action if they contracted the virus at work.The president of Nacho Daddy, Paul Hymas, said in an emailed statement on Wednesday that the company had since removed that liability language from its hiring process.Ben Casselman contributed reporting.Advertisement