https://www.nytimes.com/2020/05/14/us/politics/supreme-court-texas-prison-coronavirus.html
Supreme Court Rejects Bid for Virus Protections in Texas Prison - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
137
AdvertisementSupported byThe case was brought by two older inmates who said their lives were endangered by prison policies.By Adam LiptakWASHINGTON — The Supreme Court denied a request on Thursday from two inmates in a Texas geriatric prison to reinstate a trial judge’s order instructing officials to take steps to protect them from the coronavirus pandemic.As is the Supreme Court’s custom in ruling on emergency applications, its brief order was unsigned and gave no reasons. But Justice Sonia Sotomayor, joined by Justice Ruth Bader Ginsburg, issued a seven-page statement expressing concern about the plight of the nation’s prisoners.“It has long been said that a society’s worth can be judged by taking stock of its prisons,” Justice Sotomayor wrote. “That is all the truer in this pandemic, where inmates everywhere have been rendered vulnerable and often powerless to protect themselves from harm. May we hope that our country’s facilities serve as models rather than cautionary tales.”On April 16, Judge Keith P. Ellison, of the Federal District Court in Houston, ruled that the pandemic posed a grave threat to hundreds of prisoners held at the Wallace Pack Unit, a state geriatric prison in Grimes County, Texas.“One person incarcerated at Pack Unit has died from Covid-19,” Judge Ellison wrote, “and we are seeing Covid-19 spread like wildfire in prisons, jails and detention facilities within” the Texas prison system, “the country and the world.”The case was brought by two prisoners: Laddy Valentine, 69, who is serving a 25-year sentence for child sexual abuse, and Richard King, 73, who is serving a life sentence for murder. They told Judge Ellison that prison officials had not taken adequate steps to protect them and that conditions at the prison violated the Eighth Amendment, which prohibits cruel and unusual punishments.Hand sanitizer was unavailable, they said; guards did not wear masks; three inmates working as janitors were made to share a single pair of gloves; and part of an empty dormitory was not used to create distance among the inmates.Judge Ellison ordered prison officials to undertake some 14 measures to combat the spread of the virus, including supplying soap, masks, hand sanitizer, cleaning supplies and other materials; disinfecting common areas every 30 minutes from early morning until late evening; limiting the admission of new prisoners; testing current prisoners; and suspending co-payments for medical services.A three-judge panel of the United States Court of Appeals for the Fifth Circuit, in New Orleans, blocked Judge Ellison’s order on April 22, saying that he had exceeded his authority.The panel, in an unsigned opinion, said that the Texas Department of Criminal Justice, or T.D.C.J., had taken many steps to address the pandemic and that federal judges should not micromanage state prison systems.“The harm to T.D.C.J. is particularly acute,” the panel wrote, “because the district court’s order interferes with the rapidly changing and flexible systemwide approach that T.D.C.J. has used to respond to the pandemic so far.”In the Supreme Court, the prisoners said their case presented a matter of life and death.“While most of the country observes social distancing and remains in their homes to keep safe from Covid-19,” their brief said, “one highly at-risk population for contraction of the virus has been all but forgotten: those in our nation’s prisons. This case concerns the most basic human right — the ability to protect oneself from grave danger.”In response, prison officials said they had followed guidance from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention and faulted the prisoners for failing to follow internal grievance procedures and for waiting almost two weeks to seek relief in the Supreme Court.Updated May 28, 2020States are reopening bit by bit. This means that more public spaces are available for use and more and more businesses are being allowed to open again. The federal government is largely leaving the decision up to states, and some state leaders are leaving the decision up to local authorities. Even if you aren’t being told to stay at home, it’s still a good idea to limit trips outside and your interaction with other people.Touching contaminated objects and then infecting ourselves with the germs is not typically how the virus spreads. But it can happen. A number of studies of flu, rhinovirus, coronavirus and other microbes have shown that respiratory illnesses, including the new coronavirus, can spread by touching contaminated surfaces, particularly in places like day care centers, offices and hospitals. But a long chain of events has to happen for the disease to spread that way. The best way to protect yourself from coronavirus — whether it’s surface transmission or close human contact — is still social distancing, washing your hands, not touching your face and wearing masks.Common symptoms include fever, a dry cough, fatigue and difficulty breathing or shortness of breath. Some of these symptoms overlap with those of the flu, making detection difficult, but runny noses and stuffy sinuses are less common. The C.D.C. has also added chills, muscle pain, sore throat, headache and a new loss of the sense of taste or smell as symptoms to look out for. Most people fall ill five to seven days after exposure, but symptoms may appear in as few as two days or as many as 14 days.If air travel is unavoidable, there are some steps you can take to protect yourself. Most important: Wash your hands often, and stop touching your face. If possible, choose a window seat. A study from Emory University found that during flu season, the safest place to sit on a plane is by a window, as people sitting in window seats had less contact with potentially sick people. Disinfect hard surfaces. When you get to your seat and your hands are clean, use disinfecting wipes to clean the hard surfaces at your seat like the head and arm rest, the seatbelt buckle, the remote, screen, seat back pocket and the tray table. If the seat is hard and nonporous or leather or pleather, you can wipe that down, too. (Using wipes on upholstered seats could lead to a wet seat and spreading of germs rather than killing them.)More than 40 million people — the equivalent of 1 in 4 U.S. workers — have filed for unemployment benefits since the pandemic took hold. One in five who were working in February reported losing a job or being furloughed in March or the beginning of April, data from a Federal Reserve survey released on May 14 showed, and that pain was highly concentrated among low earners. Fully 39 percent of former workers living in a household earning $40,000 or less lost work, compared with 13 percent in those making more than $100,000, a Fed official said.There is an uptick in people reporting symptoms of chilblains, which are painful red or purple lesions that typically appear in the winter on fingers or toes. The lesions are emerging as yet another symptom of infection with the new coronavirus. Chilblains are caused by inflammation in small blood vessels in reaction to cold or damp conditions, but they are usually common in the coldest winter months. Federal health officials do not include toe lesions in the list of coronavirus symptoms, but some dermatologists are pushing for a change, saying so-called Covid toe should be sufficient grounds for testing.Yes, but make sure you keep six feet of distance between you and people who don’t live in your home. Even if you just hang out in a park, rather than go for a jog or a walk, getting some fresh air, and hopefully sunshine, is a good idea.Taking one’s temperature to look for signs of fever is not as easy as it sounds, as “normal” temperature numbers can vary, but generally, keep an eye out for a temperature of 100.5 degrees Fahrenheit or higher. If you don’t have a thermometer (they can be pricey these days), there are other ways to figure out if you have a fever, or are at risk of Covid-19 complications.The C.D.C. has recommended that all Americans wear cloth masks if they go out in public. This is a shift in federal guidance reflecting new concerns that the coronavirus is being spread by infected people who have no symptoms. Until now, the C.D.C., like the W.H.O., has advised that ordinary people don’t need to wear masks unless they are sick and coughing. Part of the reason was to preserve medical-grade masks for health care workers who desperately need them at a time when they are in continuously short supply. Masks don’t replace hand washing and social distancing.If you’ve been exposed to the coronavirus or think you have, and have a fever or symptoms like a cough or difficulty breathing, call a doctor. They should give you advice on whether you should be tested, how to get tested, and how to seek medical treatment without potentially infecting or exposing others.If you’re sick and you think you’ve been exposed to the new coronavirus, the C.D.C. recommends that you call your healthcare provider and explain your symptoms and fears. They will decide if you need to be tested. Keep in mind that there’s a chance — because of a lack of testing kits or because you’re asymptomatic, for instance — you won’t be able to get tested.Charity Navigator, which evaluates charities using a numbers-based system, has a running list of nonprofits working in communities affected by the outbreak. You can give blood through the American Red Cross, and World Central Kitchen has stepped in to distribute meals in major cities.“Defendants have worked diligently to address the harms posed by Covid-19 in exceedingly difficult circumstances, with available information and medical guidance changing on a daily basis,” the brief said. “There is no evidence that the measures required by the preliminary injunction will be any more effective against the Covid-19 pandemic than the measures already put in place by defendants.”Justice Sotomayor wrote that the prisoners had not met the demanding standards for lifting the appeals court’s stay. But she said the record in the case was filled with disturbing evidence pointing to the prison’s “lackluster efforts to keep the illness from spreading.”“While states and prisons retain discretion in how they respond to health emergencies,” she wrote, “federal courts do have an obligation to ensure that prisons are not deliberately indifferent in the face of danger and death.”Advertisement