https://www.nytimes.com/2016/03/31/us/jamar-clark-shooting-minneapolis.html
Minneapolis Officers in Jamar Clark Shooting Will Not Face Charges - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
87
AdvertisementSupported byBy Matt Furber and Mitch SmithMINNEAPOLIS — For more than 30 minutes on Wednesday, the prosecutor described in exacting detail the fatal shooting in November of an unarmed black man by the police and his reasons for not charging the two officers involved.The prosecutor, Mike Freeman, said the unarmed man, Jamar Clark, 24, had assaulted his girlfriend, interfered with paramedics and resisted when the officers tried to arrest him. He said Mr. Clark had grabbed one officer’s holstered gun, prompting the other officer to shoot. The evidence, he said, did not support claims by some witnesses that Mr. Clark was handcuffed when shot.As soon as Mr. Freeman finished his presentation, activists who had gathered began to pepper him with a series of pointed questions. They told Mr. Freeman, the Hennepin County attorney, that he had relied too much on the officers’ accounts and not enough on neighbors who witnessed the shooting. They criticized aspects of the investigation, and interrupted when Mr. Freeman tried to respond.One woman told Mr. Freeman that if there was unrest in the city, it would be his fault.After Mr. Clark’s shooting on Nov. 15, protests disrupted Minneapolis for weeks. Demonstrators occupied the area outside a police station, marched downtown and raised questions about racial disparities in Minnesota. The demonstrators sometimes clashed with officers, and one night, the police said, several men who were not part of the demonstration came and shot five people during a protest.After Wednesday’s announcement, protesters gathered at the courthouse, exchanging hugs, crying and vowing to return to the streets. “An injustice has been done today,” said Nekima Levy-Pounds, the president of the Minneapolis chapter of the N.A.A.C.P. “I believe they lie to us. I believe they tamper with evidence.”Several hundred demonstrators converged downtown Wednesday night after marching in peacefully from different parts of the city, singing songs and chanting phrases.Mr. Freeman’s presentation offered the fullest description yet of the shooting, which the police and witnesses portrayed differently last year. Many neighbors said that Mr. Clark was handcuffed when shot, but Mr. Freeman said D.N.A. and other evidence suggested that Mr. Clark’s hands were unrestrained and that he tried to gain control over one officer’s gun.“Forensic evidence and video evidence both support the belief that Clark was not handcuffed at any time through the altercation,” said Mr. Freeman, whose office posted a trove of  investigative documents online.He said the officers, Mark Ringgenberg and Dustin Schwarze, both of whom are white, “did not have a chance to withdraw or to negotiate.”Mr. Freeman showed video of the episode, including some taken by a bystander and images from an ambulance’s camera. One video showed Mr. Clark just outside an ambulance that was carrying the woman who had been hurt. Another showed an officer taking Mr. Clark to the ground. Neither provided a clear view of the shooting.Unlike prosecutors in past police shootings in his county, Mr. Freeman made the decision on charges without consulting a grand jury. Many protesters had requested that Mr. Freeman stop using grand juries in such cases, citing fatal police shootings in Cleveland and in Ferguson, Mo., where grand jurors decided not to indict officers.But even with the officers cleared of state charges, a separate federal civil rights investigation into Mr. Clark’s death is continuing, a spokesman for the United States attorney in Minnesota said this week. The spokesman, Ben Petok, declined to offer a timeline on when that investigation might finish.After the prosecutor’s announcement, Minneapolis’s mayor and its police chief held a news conference where they pledged to respect protesters but also restrict dangerous activity.“Officers will exercise restraint,” said Chief Janee Harteau, who was criticized by activists last week after posting a YouTube video warning against illegal acts and including images of firebombs and graffiti. “Their actions will be based on actions of others.”Mayor Betsy Hodges said she understood that there was “anger, disappointment, frustration, mistrust in a system that has not worked for everyone” and said she supported peaceful protests.“There is a tear that has ripped through our community,” Ms. Hodges said, “one we cannot sew back up.”Advertisement