https://www.nytimes.com/2019/05/30/us/politics/joe-biden-beau-biden-death.html
Four Years After Beau Biden’s Death, His Father Bonds With Voters in Pain - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
124
AdvertisementSupported byBy Katie GlueckPHILADELPHIA — Joseph R. Biden Jr. has a habit of bringing people to tears.For Teri Inverso, a Pennsylvania voter attending Mr. Biden’s Philadelphia rally this month, the moment came as she talked about her late parents and recalled how the former vice president coped with the death of his son Beau.For Lisa Gatto, a sister-in-law of former Representative Steve Israel, it was when she once opened up to Mr. Biden about her experience battling breast cancer, Mr. Israel recalled.And for State Senator Pam Jochum of Iowa, it happened as she recounted Mr. Biden’s condolence messages after her daughter died, and his own experiences with grief.“Everyone has had someone in their life that they lost,” Ms. Jochum said.“And the fact that he was able to pick up the pieces shows us you can continue on another pathway to make a difference,” she added. “That resiliency, the tenacity it takes to keep moving, it’s not easy, but you can do it.”[Sign up for our politics newsletter and join the conversation around the 2020 presidential race.]Four years ago this Thursday, Mr. Biden’s 46-year-old son Beau — Joseph R. Biden III, the former attorney general of Delaware — died of brain cancer, a loss that the nation witnessed as Mr. Biden was serving his final years as vice president. In 1972, Mr. Biden’s first wife and a baby daughter were killed in a car accident.Now, as Mr. Biden mounts his third run for the presidency, there is evidence that his family tragedies have helped him form connections with voters grappling with their own hardships. While political candidates often try to project sympathy — Bill Clinton was especially known for wearing his heart on his sleeve — some Democrats said they felt a bond with Mr. Biden that transcended traditional political factors: They consider him to be a singularly experienced candidate when it comes to endurance and empathy.“Some politicians have a sixth sense for weakness,” said Mr. Israel, a New York Democrat. “Some can sense power. Joe Biden has a sixth sense for people who are struggling.”That dynamic is often on display on the campaign trail, where voters share emotional stories of illness or loss before taking a photo with the former vice president or asking him a question. It was a central theme of Mr. Biden’s appearance on “The View” after he announced for president. And it was evident in voter surveys compiled by at least one would-be rival to Mr. Biden.Howard Wolfson, a senior adviser to former Mayor Michael R. Bloomberg of New York, oversaw focus groups and polling when Mr. Bloomberg was considering a 2020 presidential run. In the focus groups, Mr. Wolfson said, there was “a surprisingly high level of awareness” of Mr. Biden’s biography, and of “some of the personal tragedies that he experienced in particular.”“The awareness created a real sense of affinity and empathy,” Mr. Wolfson said. “Affinity with him, empathy for him and a real sense that his tragedies made him more relatable to them, and them more relatable to him.”[Keep up with the 2020 field with our candidate tracker.]Mr. Biden’s personal story is not enough to sustain a candidacy, of course: Many Democratic operatives and, privately, some Biden allies say they expect his current commanding lead in the polls to erode as he confronts a party base that has moved left in recent years, and as other candidates demonstrate their abilities to take on President Trump. Some Democrats also noted that any candidate’s biography, however compelling, was unlikely to drive votes on its own.“Ultimately the candidate is still going to have to make the sell on his or her vision for the country,” said former Gov. Jim Hodges of South Carolina, a Democrat who is so far neutral in the 2020 primary. “It’s going to need to be consistent with the desires and motivations of those voters.”Former Representative Ryan Costello, a Republican who served a moderate suburban Philadelphia-area district through 2018, said Mr. Biden’s biography could be compelling to the centrist voters he represented there.“There are a lot of independent voters that tend to vote the person, not the party,” he said. “Somebody who’s looking for someone who shows a certain sense of compassion, understands what personal tragedy, adversity is, can see a connection with what the vice president is going through.”(Personal appeal could also benefit President Trump, who has a strong ability to connect with conservatives and some independents, Mr. Costello added.)In his first five weeks as a candidate, Mr. Biden has frequently brought up the illness and death of Beau Biden, often as he discusses health care and insurance access. He also sometimes mentions the death of his first wife and daughter, as he did on Wednesday in Dallas, telling the story of the accident — which happened shortly after he was first elected to the Senate — to a room of school-age children. His sons, Beau and Hunter Biden, then young boys, were injured in the car crash, and Mr. Biden was sworn in from the hospital as they recovered.“For decades Joe did not talk on the campaign trail or in public events about the ways in which life really, you know, brought him to his knees, the loss of Neilia and his daughter and the ways in which those first couple of years were incredibly hard for him,” said Senator Chris Coons of Delaware, referring to Mr. Biden’s first wife. “In recent years he’s opened up a great deal more about it.”On Thursday, Mr. Biden attended a Memorial Day service in New Castle, Del., where he gave brief remarks, acknowledging his son’s death and noting that one of Beau Biden’s children, Natalie, was in attendance.“Beau cared a great deal about being here,” Mr. Biden said of his son, who was a veteran.“You all know the loss of a loved one. Somehow — the pain fades a little bit,” Mr. Biden said, but the memories “are bittersweet.”In interviews across campaign stops this month, voters who were inclined toward Mr. Biden, especially those familiar with grief, repeatedly pointed to his family story as evidence that he could handle the rigors of the presidency.As she waited for Mr. Biden to take the stage on a sunny Saturday morning in Philadelphia, Ms. Inverso pointed to Mr. Biden’s losses — and to her own — as gutting experiences that force a different kind of perspective.“That gives you a crash course in what’s important in life,” she said. “You hear that in his words. He’s sincere. He cares.”Angie French of Milford, N.H., who attended a campaign event with Mr. Biden in Nashua this month, said her brother died of glioblastoma, the same aggressive brain cancer that killed Beau Biden.“He’s had just so much loss in his life, yet this man goes on and just brings, I don’t know, just brings such a good feeling to people, again, such empathy,” said Ms. French, 45. “And we need a lot of that in the world today.”Certainly, Mr. Biden is not the only candidate to face personal loss, nor the only one embraced by voters as empathetic.This year, Mayor Pete Buttigieg’s father died just as the Indiana Democrat was starting his presidential campaign. Senator Kamala Harris of California speaks frequently about her late mother; Senator Elizabeth Warren of Massachusetts is open about the struggles her family faced after her father’s heart attack. Representative Eric Swalwell of California, another presidential candidate, sent flowers for the services of Ms. Jochum’s daughter. (Ms. Jochum, a veteran Iowa Democrat, has not endorsed a candidate but called Mr. Biden “the top of my list right now.”)Madeline Israel, Mr. Israel’s mother, heard from Mr. Biden by phone when her husband was ill, and again after his death.“These were not typical sympathy calls, these were a human being to a human being,” Ms. Israel, 84, said. “Of course I’ve never forgotten them. It just meant the world.”When asked whether she is supporting Mr. Biden for president, Ms. Israel replied, “Oh, of course,” before adding, “As of this moment.”“The main factor for me is somebody who can unite this country and the world,” she said. “Somebody that has enough experience and background. I mean, what he is as a human being may be part of it, but there’s too much at stake for me to put my own personal little feelings into my decision.”Updated May 29, 2020Advertisement