https://www.nytimes.com/2020/03/24/world/europe/britain-coronavirus-lockdown.html
Britain Locks Down to Stem the Coronavirus. More or Less. - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
342
AdvertisementSupported byA day of confusion and contradictory images as Britons struggled to adapt to the new rules, and sometimes just understand them.By Mark Landler and Stephen CastleLONDON — A day after Prime Minister Boris Johnson imposed a virtual lockdown on Britain, London’s subways teemed with rush-hour passengers while a tugboat plied its way up the Thames, a speaker serenading the handful of pedestrians ashore with the Monty Python song “Always Look on the Bright Side of Life.”It was a day of confusion and contradictory images in Britain, as people struggled to adapt to a national shutdown that, while unprecedented in the post-World War II era, still fell short of those in force in France, Spain or Italy.Much of London was deserted, as Britons responded with stoicism and greater acceptance than they had shown to previous efforts to curb the spread of the coronavirus. But the new restrictions raised vexing questions, particularly about what kind of jobs were vital enough to warrant leaving home.On Monday evening, Mr. Johnson asked Britons to stay in their houses for the next 21 days, except for occasional trips out for food, medicine, or exercise. He carved out an additional exception for people commuting to work “where this is absolutely necessary and cannot be done from home,” but left it to employers to decide whether to tell their staff to work from home.Commuters swarmed into Underground stations on Tuesday, where the sharply reduced service meant that trains were as packed as on an ordinary workday, and the government showed no inclination to reduce those numbers. Instead, it urged Transport for London, which is run by the city’s mayor, Sadiq Khan, to restore normal service.“In work, in many, many instances, the two-meter rule can be observed,” said Britain’s health secretary, Matt Hancock, referring to the social distancing that the government is promoting. Those who cannot work from home should go to work, he said, “to keep the country running.”Part of the problem, analysts said, is that the government has not yet rolled out fiscal measures to cushion the blow to self-employed workers who lose their jobs. Britain’s chancellor of the Exchequer, Rishi Sunak, said that the Treasury was scrambling to put together a package, but that it was “incredibly complicated.”Britain’s determination to keep parts of the economy operating, even as it tries to isolate much of society, carried echoes of the debate in Washington, where President Trump has argued that shutting down the economy for several months could be more damaging than the epidemic itself.There were signs of a split within the United Kingdom over how the new rules should be applied. The Johnson government said construction on commercial and residential sites could continue, since those workers were able to practice proper distancing. But the authorities in Scotland closed down construction of everything but hospitals.In London, Mr. Hancock said the government would build a temporary hospital, with capacity for 4,000 patients, in the ExCel Center, a cavernous conference center in the docklands. The hospital, one of at least four planned for the country, will start treating virus patients “within days,” he said.The number of reported coronavirus cases in Britain rose to 8,077 on Tuesday, an increase of 1,427 from Monday, while the death toll increased by 88, to 422, the largest single-day jump since the contagion began.As hospitals filled up, Mr. Hancock announced a campaign to recruit 250,000 volunteers to help the overburdened National Health Service. The volunteers will also help the 1.5 million elderly people that the government has asked to quarantine themselves for 12 weeks. About 12,000 retired doctors and nurses have agreed to return to work.Public-health experts said Britain’s lockdown had finally put the country on the right track after two weeks in which Mr. Johnson resisted taking stronger measures. But some still expressed anxiety that the government was not moving fast enough to expand testing and contact tracing to curb the spread of the virus.“We’ve definitely bought time,” said Professor Devi Sridhar, director of the global health governance program at Edinburgh University. “My fear is that people will think the lockdown solves the problem. We need to do much more testing, tracing, and isolating to use the next three weeks properly.”Even members of Mr. Johnson’s Conservative Party criticized the government for the sluggish pace in testing.“We appear to be testing on a daily basis virtually no more people than we were over a week ago, when the commitment was to increase the daily number of tests from 5,000 to 25,000,” Jeremy Hunt, a former health secretary, said in Parliament.Testing, Mr. Hunt noted, was “a vital part of the success of the suppression strategies in South Korea, Taiwan, Singapore and Hong Kong.”A dispute over the crowded subways suggested that politics was starting to bleed into Britain’s response to the crisis.In a televised briefing from 10 Downing Street, Mr. Hancock took a swipe at Mayor Khan, a Labour Party politician.Updated May 28, 2020States are reopening bit by bit. This means that more public spaces are available for use and more and more businesses are being allowed to open again. The federal government is largely leaving the decision up to states, and some state leaders are leaving the decision up to local authorities. Even if you aren’t being told to stay at home, it’s still a good idea to limit trips outside and your interaction with other people.Touching contaminated objects and then infecting ourselves with the germs is not typically how the virus spreads. But it can happen. A number of studies of flu, rhinovirus, coronavirus and other microbes have shown that respiratory illnesses, including the new coronavirus, can spread by touching contaminated surfaces, particularly in places like day care centers, offices and hospitals. But a long chain of events has to happen for the disease to spread that way. The best way to protect yourself from coronavirus — whether it’s surface transmission or close human contact — is still social distancing, washing your hands, not touching your face and wearing masks.Common symptoms include fever, a dry cough, fatigue and difficulty breathing or shortness of breath. Some of these symptoms overlap with those of the flu, making detection difficult, but runny noses and stuffy sinuses are less common. The C.D.C. has also added chills, muscle pain, sore throat, headache and a new loss of the sense of taste or smell as symptoms to look out for. Most people fall ill five to seven days after exposure, but symptoms may appear in as few as two days or as many as 14 days.If air travel is unavoidable, there are some steps you can take to protect yourself. Most important: Wash your hands often, and stop touching your face. If possible, choose a window seat. A study from Emory University found that during flu season, the safest place to sit on a plane is by a window, as people sitting in window seats had less contact with potentially sick people. Disinfect hard surfaces. When you get to your seat and your hands are clean, use disinfecting wipes to clean the hard surfaces at your seat like the head and arm rest, the seatbelt buckle, the remote, screen, seat back pocket and the tray table. If the seat is hard and nonporous or leather or pleather, you can wipe that down, too. (Using wipes on upholstered seats could lead to a wet seat and spreading of germs rather than killing them.)More than 40 million people — the equivalent of 1 in 4 U.S. workers — have filed for unemployment benefits since the pandemic took hold. One in five who were working in February reported losing a job or being furloughed in March or the beginning of April, data from a Federal Reserve survey released on May 14 showed, and that pain was highly concentrated among low earners. Fully 39 percent of former workers living in a household earning $40,000 or less lost work, compared with 13 percent in those making more than $100,000, a Fed official said.There is an uptick in people reporting symptoms of chilblains, which are painful red or purple lesions that typically appear in the winter on fingers or toes. The lesions are emerging as yet another symptom of infection with the new coronavirus. Chilblains are caused by inflammation in small blood vessels in reaction to cold or damp conditions, but they are usually common in the coldest winter months. Federal health officials do not include toe lesions in the list of coronavirus symptoms, but some dermatologists are pushing for a change, saying so-called Covid toe should be sufficient grounds for testing.Yes, but make sure you keep six feet of distance between you and people who don’t live in your home. Even if you just hang out in a park, rather than go for a jog or a walk, getting some fresh air, and hopefully sunshine, is a good idea.Taking one’s temperature to look for signs of fever is not as easy as it sounds, as “normal” temperature numbers can vary, but generally, keep an eye out for a temperature of 100.5 degrees Fahrenheit or higher. If you don’t have a thermometer (they can be pricey these days), there are other ways to figure out if you have a fever, or are at risk of Covid-19 complications.The C.D.C. has recommended that all Americans wear cloth masks if they go out in public. This is a shift in federal guidance reflecting new concerns that the coronavirus is being spread by infected people who have no symptoms. Until now, the C.D.C., like the W.H.O., has advised that ordinary people don’t need to wear masks unless they are sick and coughing. Part of the reason was to preserve medical-grade masks for health care workers who desperately need them at a time when they are in continuously short supply. Masks don’t replace hand washing and social distancing.If you’ve been exposed to the coronavirus or think you have, and have a fever or symptoms like a cough or difficulty breathing, call a doctor. They should give you advice on whether you should be tested, how to get tested, and how to seek medical treatment without potentially infecting or exposing others.If you’re sick and you think you’ve been exposed to the new coronavirus, the C.D.C. recommends that you call your healthcare provider and explain your symptoms and fears. They will decide if you need to be tested. Keep in mind that there’s a chance — because of a lack of testing kits or because you’re asymptomatic, for instance — you won’t be able to get tested.Charity Navigator, which evaluates charities using a numbers-based system, has a running list of nonprofits working in communities affected by the outbreak. You can give blood through the American Red Cross, and World Central Kitchen has stepped in to distribute meals in major cities.“There is no good reason in the information that I’ve seen that the current levels of tube provision should be as low as they are,” Mr. Hancock said. “We should have more tube trains running.”Minutes later, a spokesman for the mayor fired back, saying that nearly one-third of the Underground’s staff was unavailable, either because of illness or the need to self-isolate. He criticized the government for refusing to close construction sites or provide “proper financial support” to the self-employed.There were also questions about how strictly the government plans to crack down on people who flout the restrictions.While Mr. Johnson said the police would enforce the lockdown, and there were photos of police shutting down stores, the British police force is stretched thin. And the fine for those who violate the rules is only £30 — about $35 — though officials said it might increase.The government even struggled to explain how the new rules apply to people in relationships who do not live with their partners. Asked for guidance, the deputy chief medical officer, Jenny Harries, said the government did not want people switching from one household to another.Perhaps, said Dr. Harries with a rare flash of humor in grim times, “they should test the strength of their relationship” by moving in together.Andrew Testa contributed reporting.Advertisement