https://www.nytimes.com/2020/04/27/us/coronavirus-governors-states-reopening.html
Texas and Other States Reopening: A Confusing Patchwork - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
245
AdvertisementSupported bySeveral states, including Texas and Florida, have stay-at-home orders expiring this week. “That executive order has done its job to slow the growth of Covid-19,” Gov. Greg Abbott of Texas said.By Jack Healy, Manny Fernandez and Peter BakerDENVER — Governors across the country forged ahead Monday with plans to reopen their economies, even as the nation hit a grim milestone of 50,000 deaths from the coronavirus and public health experts warned against lifting stay-at-home orders too quickly.Numerous states, including some of the largest, began the process of lifting shelter orders in what could be a pivotal stage in the U.S. response to the pandemic.Texas, with its population of nearly 30 million, made one of the most expansive moves toward reopening when Gov. Greg Abbott announced that retail stores, restaurants, movie theaters and malls would be allowed to reopen with limited capacity on Friday. In Ohio, Gov. Mike DeWine unveiled a more incremental reopening plan that would allow manufacturing work to resume and offices to reopen next week. And in Colorado, businesses tried to navigate new rules allowing some of them to open their doors on Monday.The moves came as President Trump promised to help the states ramp up testing and called on them to consider reconvening schools before the end of the academic year rather than waiting until the fall, as many districts have decided or are expected to do.In a conference call with the governors devoted mainly to ventilators and testing, Mr. Trump raised the idea of bringing students back to classrooms in the next few weeks. “Some of you might start to think about school openings,” he said, according to an audio recording. Addressing Vice President Mike Pence, who was also on the call, he added, “I think it’s something, Mike, they can seriously consider and maybe get going on it.”A White House document makes clear that the states are still primarily responsible for testing and that Washington is only the “supplier of last resort.” Administration officials told reporters that the testing plan commits the federal government to help each of the 50 states test at least 2 percent of their populations every month. But that figure was not in the document, and the president did not mention it at Monday’s briefing.Rather than the more comprehensive surveillance testing sought by many public health experts, the administration is focused on “sentinel” testing of targeted sites that are particularly vulnerable, like nursing homes and inner-city health centers.“We want to get our country open,” Mr. Trump said at the briefing, which included a group of business executives who promised to help with testing.New coronavirus infections and deaths appear to be plateauing on a national level, but they are still surging in some of the states and counties reopening this week.As the known death toll from the virus crossed the bleak threshold of 50,000 people, according to a New York Times tally, the total number of confirmed cases in the country topped 983,000. Health experts worry that reopening prematurely without sufficient testing, protective equipment and other safeguards could fuel another spike in cases that may not be detected in official numbers for two weeks.“There’s a belief that we’ve brought our numbers down, we’re out of the woods. That is completely not the case,” said Jennifer Nuzzo, a senior scholar at the Johns Hopkins Center for Health Security. “They’ve seen a decline in the sickest patients, but there’s a lot of infection that can spread silently, and suddenly you’re back where you started.”The efforts to reopen across the country were creating a patchwork of contradictory rules that could undermine weeks of messages urging Americans to stay home and could endanger the entire nation’s ability to beat back the pandemic.In states that were hardest hit, leaders have been more tentative. In New York, Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo on Monday said that what he called low-risk businesses upstate could begin reopening by mid-May, but he cautioned that shutdown orders were likely to be extended for many parts of the state.Although the states around Louisiana have started easing restrictions, Gov. John Bel Edwards said on Monday that he was extending his state’s stay-at-home order into next month. “The fact is,” Mr. Edwards said at a briefing, “we just don’t meet the criteria.”Even as the states take different approaches, Attorney General William P. Barr signaled that he had reservations about the way some officials were reopening their economies. He asked federal prosecutors around the country on Monday to look out for emergency state or local orders issued to contain the coronavirus pandemic that could also violate “constitutional rights and civil liberties” and to fight them in court if needed.Several of the states that are reopening still do not have widespread testing or systems in place to track infections.In the seven weeks since Mr. Trump promised that anyone who needed a test could get one, the United States has conducted about 5.2 million tests, far more than any other country but the equivalent of about 1.6 percent of the total population. That is a small fraction of what public health experts say is necessary to ensure a safe and gradual reopening of schools, businesses and other public venues.A group of experts convened by Harvard University’s Edmond J. Safra Center for Ethics has called for 5 million tests a day by early June, ramping up to 20 million per day by late July.Paul Romer, a Nobel Prize-winning economist from New York University, has called for 25 million tests per day, with the capacity to test twice that many in “surge” situations.Mr. Romer said testing 2 percent of the population was “not enough to test everyone in health care even once; let alone to keep retesting them every day, which is what it would take to keep those who do get infected from going on shift and infecting their colleagues.”While most governors took similar steps to shut down public life last month as coronavirus cases soared, they are now trying to calibrate how to revive their economies amid clashing pressures to protect people’s health while also helping millions of unemployed Americans get back to work.transcriptMy executive order to stay at home that was issued last month is set to expire on April the 30th. That executive order has done its job to slow the growth of Covid-19. And I will let it expire as scheduled. Now it’s time to set a new course, a course that responsibly opens up business in Texas. Retail stories, restaurants, movie theaters and malls can reopen May the 1st. Now to minimize the spread of Covid-19 during Phase 1, on the advice of doctors, I am limiting occupancy to no more than 25 percent. If Phase 1 works while containing Covid-19, Phase 2 will expand that occupancy to 50 percent: Further increases will be allowed in the future so long as Covid-19 remains contained.Governors who were the first to allow businesses to open have been criticized by mayors, public health experts and even Mr. Trump — who has urged states to reopen — for acting too hastily.Mr. Abbott had previously lifted some restrictions, including on retail shopping and state parks. But his announcement on Monday brought his state to the brink of a complete reopening.The governor said that Texas was not as hard-hit as other states, and that it had expanded testing, stocked up on protective equipment and witnessed the third-most coronavirus recoveries in the country. Mr. Abbott said that as a result, he was letting the stay-at-home mandate end, a move that gave Texas one of the shortest such orders in the country.Mr. Abbott had issued the order far later than the governors in California, New York and other large states. The Texas mandate will have been in effect for 28 days when it expires on Thursday.“That executive order has done its job to slow the growth of Covid-19,” Mr. Abbott told reporters at the Texas Capitol on Monday.On Monday, states that were beginning to reopen faced an uneasy balance as lunch patrons at Tennessee diners and shaggy-haired barbershop customers in Colorado greeted the resumption of normal life with a mix of relief and wariness.Dine-in restaurant service resumed across much of Tennessee even as the state reported 250 new cases on Monday, a day after its largest one-day spike in infections.Under a plan laid out by Gov. Bill Lee, restaurants outside of Tennessee’s largest cities are now allowed to serve dine-in customers with half of their usual capacity and with no more than six people per table. Employees and customers should also be screened for signs of sickness, according to the plan. Bars are not allowed to reopen; live music performances are also forbidden.Andy Marshall opened four of his nine restaurants on Monday, drawing a modest but steady crowd for lunch at his Puckett’s Grocery locations, where they serve Southern staples.“I figure things are going to be slow for a while,” he said, “and we’re going to have to get patient.”But health experts warned that the virus does not care about state and city borders, and they worried that people in places with tighter rules would simply wander out to eat or shop in less-regulated places and return home, potentially spreading the virus.“If you want a hamburger on a Friday night and your favorite restaurant is closed in Nashville or Memphis, you’re probably going to drive 20 minutes down the road,” said Dr. Aaron Milstone, a pulmonary specialist in Franklin, Tenn., who led efforts to convince the governor to issue a stay-at-home order.In Colorado, real estate showings were allowed to restart on Monday as the governor’s stay-at-home order expired, and pet owners were able to take their dogs and cats to the vet for nonemergency operations. At the same time, Denver and many surrounding suburbs decided to extend their closure orders through the first week of May, leaving most businesses closed.Many business owners said they were uncertain about the new rules, and were trying to make sense of a cacophony of messages from President Trump, governors, county commissioners and mayors.“I couldn’t sleep last night because I was so confused,” Jose Oregel, who owns a barbershop in Greeley, Colo., said on Monday morning, an hour before he was expecting some of his first customers, who will now get haircuts from barbers in face masks and gloves.Updated May 28, 2020States are reopening bit by bit. This means that more public spaces are available for use and more and more businesses are being allowed to open again. The federal government is largely leaving the decision up to states, and some state leaders are leaving the decision up to local authorities. Even if you aren’t being told to stay at home, it’s still a good idea to limit trips outside and your interaction with other people.Touching contaminated objects and then infecting ourselves with the germs is not typically how the virus spreads. But it can happen. A number of studies of flu, rhinovirus, coronavirus and other microbes have shown that respiratory illnesses, including the new coronavirus, can spread by touching contaminated surfaces, particularly in places like day care centers, offices and hospitals. But a long chain of events has to happen for the disease to spread that way. The best way to protect yourself from coronavirus — whether it’s surface transmission or close human contact — is still social distancing, washing your hands, not touching your face and wearing masks.Common symptoms include fever, a dry cough, fatigue and difficulty breathing or shortness of breath. Some of these symptoms overlap with those of the flu, making detection difficult, but runny noses and stuffy sinuses are less common. The C.D.C. has also added chills, muscle pain, sore throat, headache and a new loss of the sense of taste or smell as symptoms to look out for. Most people fall ill five to seven days after exposure, but symptoms may appear in as few as two days or as many as 14 days.If air travel is unavoidable, there are some steps you can take to protect yourself. Most important: Wash your hands often, and stop touching your face. If possible, choose a window seat. A study from Emory University found that during flu season, the safest place to sit on a plane is by a window, as people sitting in window seats had less contact with potentially sick people. Disinfect hard surfaces. When you get to your seat and your hands are clean, use disinfecting wipes to clean the hard surfaces at your seat like the head and arm rest, the seatbelt buckle, the remote, screen, seat back pocket and the tray table. If the seat is hard and nonporous or leather or pleather, you can wipe that down, too. (Using wipes on upholstered seats could lead to a wet seat and spreading of germs rather than killing them.)More than 40 million people — the equivalent of 1 in 4 U.S. workers — have filed for unemployment benefits since the pandemic took hold. One in five who were working in February reported losing a job or being furloughed in March or the beginning of April, data from a Federal Reserve survey released on May 14 showed, and that pain was highly concentrated among low earners. Fully 39 percent of former workers living in a household earning $40,000 or less lost work, compared with 13 percent in those making more than $100,000, a Fed official said.There is an uptick in people reporting symptoms of chilblains, which are painful red or purple lesions that typically appear in the winter on fingers or toes. The lesions are emerging as yet another symptom of infection with the new coronavirus. Chilblains are caused by inflammation in small blood vessels in reaction to cold or damp conditions, but they are usually common in the coldest winter months. Federal health officials do not include toe lesions in the list of coronavirus symptoms, but some dermatologists are pushing for a change, saying so-called Covid toe should be sufficient grounds for testing.Yes, but make sure you keep six feet of distance between you and people who don’t live in your home. Even if you just hang out in a park, rather than go for a jog or a walk, getting some fresh air, and hopefully sunshine, is a good idea.Taking one’s temperature to look for signs of fever is not as easy as it sounds, as “normal” temperature numbers can vary, but generally, keep an eye out for a temperature of 100.5 degrees Fahrenheit or higher. If you don’t have a thermometer (they can be pricey these days), there are other ways to figure out if you have a fever, or are at risk of Covid-19 complications.The C.D.C. has recommended that all Americans wear cloth masks if they go out in public. This is a shift in federal guidance reflecting new concerns that the coronavirus is being spread by infected people who have no symptoms. Until now, the C.D.C., like the W.H.O., has advised that ordinary people don’t need to wear masks unless they are sick and coughing. Part of the reason was to preserve medical-grade masks for health care workers who desperately need them at a time when they are in continuously short supply. Masks don’t replace hand washing and social distancing.If you’ve been exposed to the coronavirus or think you have, and have a fever or symptoms like a cough or difficulty breathing, call a doctor. They should give you advice on whether you should be tested, how to get tested, and how to seek medical treatment without potentially infecting or exposing others.If you’re sick and you think you’ve been exposed to the new coronavirus, the C.D.C. recommends that you call your healthcare provider and explain your symptoms and fears. They will decide if you need to be tested. Keep in mind that there’s a chance — because of a lack of testing kits or because you’re asymptomatic, for instance — you won’t be able to get tested.Charity Navigator, which evaluates charities using a numbers-based system, has a running list of nonprofits working in communities affected by the outbreak. You can give blood through the American Red Cross, and World Central Kitchen has stepped in to distribute meals in major cities.Local health leaders in Mr. Oregel’s corner of Northern Colorado, a conservative hub of ranching and oil drilling, had urged county leaders not to reopen amid a surge of coronavirus cases tied to a meatpacking plant and other hot spots. But county leaders said businesses had a right to open, and Mr. Oregel, who has bills to pay, decided it was worth the risk.“It’s hard,” said Bob Smith, 60, who opened Continuum Coffee on Monday for takeout only. He said he did not anticipate that tables of lingering latte drinkers would be back anytime soon. “You hear one government office saying, ‘You’re good,’ and another saying, ‘No you’re not.’ I don’t know.”Florida and Arizona have stay-at-home orders due to expire on Thursday, but the governors of both states have been vague about their plans. Gov. Ron DeSantis said that while he had discussed how to reopen with other Southern states, Florida was so big and diverse that it required its own rules.“I have five states in one, pretty much, here already,” Mr. DeSantis said on Monday at a news conference. “This is a bottom-up deal” beginning with cities and counties.In Arizona, Gov. Doug Ducey has signaled that he will follow reopening guidelines provided to governors from the White House. Mr. Ducey has faced intense pressure to reopen parts of Arizona’s economy as conservative protesters, many holding military-style rifles, have swarmed the State Capitol to demand an easing of distancing measures.While public health experts warn that many states still have vulnerable health systems and are not doing enough testing, some governors have said they can reopen because of new temporary hospital beds, fewer hospitalized patients and a slowly growing testing capacity.In Ohio, Governor DeWine said that the state should be able to triple the amount of testing by the end of May, to 22,000 tests per day from 7,200, and that volunteers were being trained to trace contacts for coronavirus cases.Mr. DeWine was the first governor to shut down schools statewide and has taken among the most aggressive approaches, but he said there was a growing risk to the economy if Ohio did not start reopening.“I think we found the spot that is most likely to cause less damage, more likely to cause good,” Mr. DeWine said. “But it is a risk, and I fully understand the risk.”With states not bound by any unified national plan, the different timelines for reopening have created a gulf between those hustling to reopen restaurants, movie theaters and tattoo parlors, and New York and California, which are moving more slowly and cautiously toward reopening. Governors in Hawaii, New Mexico and Louisiana have all extended their states’ stay-at-home-orders. And in California, Gov. Gavin Newsom warned on Monday that the timetable for opening up could be jeopardized by people ignoring social distancing rules after images recently circulated of packed beaches in Southern California and new data showed an increase in movement across the state.transcriptFrom The New York Times, I’m Michael Barbaro. This is “The Daily.”When Louisiana’s stay at home order expires today, restaurants across the state can begin allowing customers back inside at their own discretion. That decision now lies with restaurant owners, like Jasmine Lombrage.It’s Friday, May 15.Hello?Hi.Hi, how are you?Oh, good. You sound great right now.Wonderful, wonderful. Hi. I’m Jasmine Lombrage.Hi, Jasmine. I’m Michael Barbaro.Hi, nice — nice to meet you this way.Very nice to meet you this way. Where exactly am I reaching you?I am at the Bullfish Bar Plus Kitchen here in Baton Rouge, La.That’s your restaurant?Yes.So how long have you lived in Baton Rouge?Me, personally, about 17 years. My husband has been here over 20 years. And we have two girls, two beautiful girls, Gaby — she’s turning 11 next month — and we have our gorgeous Angelle. She’s nine.How did you and your husband meet?[LAUGHS] It’s an old love story. We met at school. I was in dental hygiene school, and he was in culinary school. And he was working at that cafeteria. My friends said that they have good food over there, and they wanted to go. And so we went over there, and he was a quiet guy in the corner doing his own thing. I said, excuse me, what do you have here that is good and healthy that I can eat? And he looks up, and he said, Nothing is good enough for you.Oh, jeez.And then I turned to walk away, and he said, But if you come back tomorrow, I’ll make something for you.Mm-hmm.And I just kind of smiled and said, No, thank you. And I had a few friends who are like, Yes, we’re coming back tomorrow. So the next day, he made something for me. He made stir fry, and my friends — I had one of my crazy friends. She said — I said, I’m not going to eat. I don’t know if this guy is some kind of psycho or crazy and he’s going to put something in my food. She’s like, “Well, I’m going to eat. If nothing happens to me in a few minutes, then you — you can try it.” So that’s what happened. And he came back and asked, how was everything? I said, it was good. And then we started talking. Then — no then he said I’m going to be his wife, and I said, I’m sorry. That’s not going to happen. You know, and he said, well, he’s a praying man. He always gets his heart desire.[LAUGHS]Yes, 10 years later, we ended up married.So when you — when you two met, you were a dental hygienist student. He was training to be a chef.Yes.And so how did you end up in the food industry?Well, growing up, my mom always cooked, you know, for many people. So it was always a passion. I grew up cooking also with mom and just family and aunts. We just — that was just something we did. And then Angel, my husband, Chef Angel, my husband, you know, we — he was the executive corporate chef that started Voodoo BBQ & Grill, which is a restaurant here in the South. And he was known as the Pitmaster. And so what we did, we started Jazz City then, Jazz City was a catering company. And we were — he was like, well, this is what I love to do. And we wanted to do something — we have two young kids. We know that, you know, you can work hard for anyone and everyone, but really, if you want to leave that — create something for your family, you need to create something so that it can stay down and passed down for generations and generations and possibly grow. And that is our goal is to have it grow and flourish. And we ended up here at the Bullfish, and Bullfish was already — it was a restaurant previously owned by someone else. And when we came here, we made it our own by bringing new menu items. And this is the only place you can come in Louisiana and find an authentic Caribbean and Southern fusion cuisine. What he’s done, what Chef has mastered, he’s taken the fresh herbs that we have in the Caribbean, and then he’s merged it with the wonderful spices that we have here in Louisiana. And he — there’s a fusion of jerk, fish, and Southern barbecue shrimp.Mm.Yes. And the paella — you know, Chef makes a paella with — you know, he uses scallops. And the crawfish, which is from Louisiana, he infuses that with the andouille sausage, and then he puts the shrimp in there and the crab meat. And so it’s just the different twist that he puts on all of the dishes. It’s just magic in your mouth.Mm.And I don’t know if you heard the music in the background a little. We kind of use a lot of Caribbean kind of music from different parts of the Caribbean, and we play different music from here. The vibe is just so, I don’t need a passport, but I can get away here. Does that makes sense?Mm-hmm. It’s funny you keep calling your husband “chef.” Is that how you refer to him?At work, we keep it professional. At home, well, when we get in a car, it’s “honey.” But when we’re at work, we refer to each other — I refer to him as Chef, and he would just say whatever he had to say to me or, OK, yes, ma’am, and that would be it.Got it.Yes.And when did you take over the restaurant?That was last year, 2019, May 22, 2019.OK. So just about — just about a year ago.Yes. And this restaurant, the Bullfish, it is personal for us, because our home is connected to the Bullfish.Huh.Yes. So that’s why this pandemic — I personally have spent many nights not sleeping, because I know our home is connected to it. It’s not like we have 5, 6, 7, 20 locations. This is all we have. In our home, we have two kids. My daughter, my oldest, Gaby, she’s autistic. I don’t know — I mean, I don’t know what’s going to happen, but for now, she’s depending on us to care for her. So as she grows, the home is — before we committed our home to the Bullfish — was part of the security blanket that we had. In the event something happened, she would have that.Tell me what you mean when you say that your home is connected to Bullfish. You mean physically or emotionally or what?Well, whenever you get a loan, you have to give some kind of guarantee, like a personal guarantee. And that’s what we did, you know. We took that leap of faith and decided that we were going to put 100 percent in here to make it work. So we have to make the Bullfish work.So if something were to happen to the restaurant, it would mean potentially losing your home?Yes.And it sounds like that house is something you plan on passing on to your daughter, who’s autistic.Yes, well, both of our girls, but we know her, at least, we can have somewhere for her in case she needed somewhere to be, and then we can have that there for her. That is something that always gets me emotional talking about, because —Mm-hmm.[CRYING] I’m sorry.I understand.It’s — you know, and she’s standing in front of me looking at me now. And we want to do whatever it takes to make it work.You know, we just have to make it work. So when this pandemic started, it really gave us a scare, because if we’re not able to pay for everything, and we default on our loan, well, we understood the consequences, you know.Was there a moment when you felt that you had really kind of made it with this place, having bought it and started to make it your own?Yes. About a month before the pandemic, we were like, yeah, this was a good choice. My husband and I, we usually go to early morning service for church, and afterwards, we came here for brunch. And then before we were open, we had people waiting outside for us.Wow.It was wonderful. And we were like, OK, wow, this is really going to work. This is really working. And wow, honey, this is our baby, and we’re going to grow it, and we’re going to be able to pay up the loan, and we’re going to be able to just blow this thing out of the park. And then the pandemic started. And yes.When did you first start to notice that the pandemic was impacting the restaurant?OK, early March — early March, because it was February was good with Valentine’s Day. Early March is when everything started changing, and as March went on, the governor shut down the state. This is when, you know, you started losing staff members saying they’re not coming out. I mean, you cannot blame them. We also started doing curbside delivery, and we were doing social media posts and putting up signs, handwritten signs offering discounts, letting people know that curbside pickup is available, just getting different yard signs made.So you have to put up signs in the windows or outside telling people, we’re still around, you just need to call in.Yes, yes, yes. And then about maybe the second week after the state was closed, we would be lucky if we got two people that would call for curbside pickup. And we would just be sitting here the entire day, 11 to 8, and there’s no one that would come by or no one that would call. So then I started calling the restaurant phone a couple of times to make sure the phone was working, because it never rang. We were there for hours.So you called the restaurant’s main number with your cell phone just to see if it was working.Yes. [LAUGHS]WowAnd, you know, I started reaching out to third party — third party delivery providers to see if I can sign up with them, like Uber Eats and Waitr and DoorDash and ChowNow. And they’re charging — some of them are charging from 25 percent to 35 percent.Per order?Yeah, that’s your food costs. Yes. You know, in addition to that, we’re not able to buy in bulk anymore, because we’ve wasted so much food. We’ve thrown away so much stuff, so now we’re having to go ourselves, Chef and I, to different mom and pop stores that are open, and we’re having to purchase items. Of course, now you’re paying more money for them, because you’re not buying the same quantity anymore, and you’re buying from a local retailer. So, you know, and then we have a bar here, and we weren’t — no one was coming out to drink anymore, so that went away. So yeah, the pandemic, you know, it’s been hard on us.Mm-hm. I’m so sorry.Yes.So with these delivery apps, these new sources of orders, how much money do you make off of any individual customer percentage-wise?Right now, you don’t, because the fact that we’re buying things from not just local distributors but smaller volume — we’re buying things in smaller volume, so our profit margin is smaller. So we’re basically not making anything. You’re keeping the doors open, but you’re not making anything from it.Can you give us a sense of where your daughters have been throughout this period? At what point was their schooling interrupted?Maybe March. Angelle, when did school close? March or April?[FAINT] It closed in March.OK, school closed in March.Mm-hmm.I used to bring my — I still do bring my two girls, so I can homeschool them, because school — they are out of school. So I use a corner of the restaurant, and I do schooling there for my girls. But it was a challenge. The change was not welcomed and open for the girls, especially my oldest, Gaby.What do you mean?You know, with autism, everything has to be — you need to have something — everything scheduled and everything has a plan you need to follow through. And this whole pandemic kind of just went haywire for her in the beginning. She was not sleeping. She was more agitated. And my youngest, Angelle, she kept saying she wanted to go back to school, so I had to find other ways to help them. So —And Jasmine, I think I hear your daughters in the background. Is that right?Yes, you do.Do you think there was a point where your daughters picked up on what has been happening for you and your husband, but beyond the stresses that they’re experiencing, you know, from not being at school and social distancing, that they understood that you and your husband are struggling with this business and struggling financially?I think so. There is one incident. My daughter, my youngest, she — you know, she gets allowance, and someone gives her money or whatever. And she saved the money, and one day, she wrote a note. And then she left a note on the bed, on my bed. I was taking a bath, and I came out, and she had a note saying that, Mom, I know you and Dad are working really hard, and things are really tough. I have some money saved. I hope this helps for you to pay for stuff.Oh, wow.Yes. That was hard. That was hard.How old is this daughter who left you —Angelle was 8 when she did that. She just turned 9 in April. So she had a pandemic birthday.Can I ask how much she gave you?I think it was like $57 she had.Wow.And what did you do with it?I still have it saved.I still have it there. I try not to use it. It was just such a touching moment, and just to see, you know, that they realize, kids realize more than you let them know. And knowing that they’re here like almost every single day with me, and —They see everything.Yes.How bad are things, financially speaking, right now?Not close at all to where we want to be. Not good at all. Not good at all. We have applied for a lot of, you know, small business loans, and we’re just waiting to hear back.Have you been able to cover all the payments that you owe to the bank?I haven’t. I think finance is one of the things people don’t like to talk about, but I haven’t been able to meet a lot of — I had to ask for abatements. So we’ll see what happens.Mm-hmm.I mean, do you think there is a situation that you could imagine using that money from your youngest daughter, that $57?I don’t want to — I don’t want to, because it’s hers. Even though she gave it to me, it’s hers. I do not want — I don’t want to.Right.I —I’m just afraid to — I’m just afraid to even think about a situation like that.We’ll be right back.Jasmine, for listeners who don’t know what the rules are in Louisiana, what was announced earlier this week?Well, restaurants — commencing Friday, you can, restaurants can be open for 25 percent of the capacity.So you can seat up to 25 percent of what would normally fit inside the restaurant. So how many people do you think that is?Well, we can seat about 90 people comfortably in here. And so about 25 percent of that now is what we’re allowed to do.So if you can only put, you know, 20 or so people inside, can you make money?I don’t see how that’s going to happen, to be honest with you, because 20 percent — having 20 percent of people inside the business is not enough to sustain, and I don’t know how long that’s going to go on for.Right.So [SIGHS] it’s hard. It’s a hard thing to digest right now.But you have decided that you’re going to let people back inside?Honestly, me, personally, no. So it is still an open debate. We — actually, after I’m done with this interview, we’re going to sit down and weigh our options, the pros and the cons, and see if it’s something that we want to do.Can I ask you what you see as the cons and the pros?Yeah, the pros — that, you know, we’ll have 25 percent more revenue than what we’re seeing now. And then the cons is knowing that someone will — I’m afraid that, oh, my god, somebody’s going to come out, and they’re a carrier of Covid-19, and they infect somebody else. So I have no way of controlling that.Have you heard from customers about their opinions on whether it’s time to go back inside the restaurant?Yes, I have. I’ve had mixed reviews. We tend to ask customers, whenever they’re picking up or, are they ready for everything to open back up. That’s normally the question we would ask. And I feel that I’m getting more nos than yes, though, in my opinion.Mm.Yes.Those who have told you, Jasmine, that they do want to come out, what did they say is their reason for wanting to come out, to come back and eat in a restaurant?They want to get out of the house. You know, sometimes it’s just the fact that you cannot do something makes you want to do it.[LAUGHS] Yes. Yes, the forbidden fruit. Yes.Yes. My point, that’s exactly. Like, oh, you tell me I cannot eat this? OK, I’m going to. So yes, that’s what I feel I’m getting.I wonder, for you, if you didn’t run a restaurant, would you go out and eat right now? Would you walk into a restaurant, sit down, order food?I would probably go out on a weekday, because weekdays are usually less busy, because I have a child that has a compromised immune system. So I’m usually very careful to go out. I don’t want to take something home to her, so that would be another reason that I personally will not go out. And if I did go out, minus my daughter’s situation, I would have definitely found the seat — ask to be seated in the area that is far away from everybody else.I mean it’s interesting to hear you say that, that you wouldn’t want to go to a restaurant unless it was specifically at a slow time because of the health of your daughter, because you’re talking about yourself reopening a restaurant. So it’s quite a weird conundrum.Yes, but it’s honest.I just want to make sure I understand which of your daughters is immunocompromised.Gaby is.Is that the daughter who is autistic?Yes, because she was a former premature baby. I ruptured at 14 weeks when I was pregnant with her, and she had a lot of health challenges. They said, you know, that Gaby would never walk, talk, see, or hear. She was not via — she does not have any viability of life, and that she would never make it out of the hospital alive, you know. We were told that we were making a mistake for her. She coded, and it was even pronounced, and she came back. And she had a trach before, and she was on a ventilator before. She was on oxygen for the first — almost the first four years of her life. You know, she started talking late, walking late, and she had to do therapy, and, you know, she had a walker. So she had a lot of challenges to see where she is now and where she came from. So I’m always careful, you know. A typical cold for you and I is just a cold, but for her, it can lead to pneumonia, or we’ve lost her. We’ve had her stop breathing a couple times, and nothing —I don’t even know how to explain that.Mm. Given your daughter’s health, are you worried that you’re going to basically be in the kind of situation it sounds like you’re afraid of kind of all the time, because people are going to be coming into your restaurant, and they could potentially get you sick, and you could potentially get your daughter sick?Yes. You know, I don’t know what I would do if I find myself bringing something to my child. So I find myself in a very difficult position as a business owner.That would be very hard to live with. I understand.That would — yes. You know —I mean, it sounds — it sounds like that —[SIGHS]— that has to — that has to be weighing on you as you’re making this decision.Yes, it is. It is. It is. This is personal. This is not like, oh, OK, well, I’m just going to open and make the money. It’s not that situation for me. I have to be careful for it. I am responsible for her, and I’m also responsible for my customers, making sure they have the best experience. And I’m also responsible for my team that are coming to work. So —And you’re also responsible for that house —Yes!— that is connected to this —Right!— restaurant.Yes.Yeah.So my hands are tied. Like, yes. It — yes, I’m just — I’m just in a bind.Yeah, I’m just in a bind right now. And say hi, Gaby.Hi.Hi, Gaby.Say hi. It’s OK.Hi.Oh, I want to see you on the video. Nice to meet you, Gaby.Can you see her? I don’t know how this works.Mm-hmm. I can see her. Yeah, she’s got a great — she’s got a leopard patterned sweater on.Yes. Are you going to talk?Hi.Hi. Gaby is waving.How are you doing?I’m doing well. Your mom was just telling us about you.She — she loves you.Yes. [LAUGHS] Yes.She loves you — she loves you very much.I do. I love you, Gab.I love you, too.OK.Well, that was — that was a nice gift.Yes, she walked up, so. [SIGH] I’m sorry.Yeah, just give me a sec. Oof.I’m sorry. I didn’t mean that —No, I —Hence the reason why I’m torn up. For someone that was 1 pound, 3 ounces when she was born, she is like — she’s like — I mean she’s beautiful. She’s doing so well. And then this is so scary.Yeah.This is so scary, you know. And then it’s a hard decision. I — we don’t open up, then to get customers to come in, we’re putting our house more at risk. We open up, and then something happens, then I’m putting my child’s life at risk. I don’t want — I don’t even want to be me right now.Yep.I’m going to be really eager — we’re all going to be very eager to understand what decision you make. And I want you to know that we really enjoyed getting to know you and talking to you, and we’re rooting for you and for your family.Thank you. Thank you so very much. Thank you.Thank you, and please give our best to your husband and to the rest of your family.Thank you.Bye.Gaby says bye.Bye, Gaby.Say bye.Bye.OK, thank you, guys.Bye.On Thursday night, after we spoke, Jasmine, her husband, and their staff decided that they would reopen their restaurant for indoor dining, starting on Tuesday. We’ll be right back.Here’s what else you need to know today.Good morning, Chairwoman Eshoo and Ranking Member Burgess and distinguished members of the subcommittee. I am Dr. Rick Bright, a career public servant, and a scientist who has spent 25 years of my career focused on addressing pandemic outbreaks.In testimony, before the House on Thursday, a whistleblower, who was fired as head of a federal research agency, said that the Trump administration failed to heed his warnings about the shortage of medical supplies in the national stockpile and that Americans died as a result.Congresswoman, we’ve known for quite some time that our stockpile is insufficient in having those critical personal protective equipment. So once this virus began spreading, it became known to be a threat, I began pushing urgently in January, along with some industry colleagues as well, and those urges, those alarms were not responded to with action.His testimony marked the first time that a federal scientist has gone before Congress and openly accused the Trump administration of endangering American lives by bungling its response to the coronavirus.Without better planning, 2020 could be the darkest winter in modern history.And Republican Senator Richard Burr of North Carolina, the chairman of the Senate Intelligence Committee, temporarily stepped down on Thursday amid an F.B.I. investigation into whether he sold hundreds of thousands of dollars worth of stocks using nonpublic information about the coronavirus that he learned during a Senate briefing. Over the past few days, the F.B.I. has seized Burr’s cell phone and searched his electronic records, suggesting that Burr may be in serious legal jeopardy.“The Daily” is made by Theo Balcomb, Andy Mills, Lisa Tobin, Rachel Quester, Lynsea Garrison, Annie Brown, Clare Toeniskoetter, Paige Cowett, Michael Simon Johnson, Brad Fisher, Larissa Anderson, Wendy Dorr, Chris Wood, Jessica Cheung, Stella Tan, Alexandra Leigh Young, Jonathan Wolfe, Lisa Chow, Eric Krupke, Marc Georges, Luke Vander Ploeg, Adizah Eghan, Kelly Prime, Julia Longoria, Sindhu Gnanasambandan, M.J. Davis Lin, Austin Mitchell, Sayre Quevedo, Neena Pathak, Dan Powell, Dave Shaw, Sydney Harper, Daniel Guillemette, Hans Buetow, Robert Jimison, Mike Benoist, Bianca Giaever, and Asthaa Chaturvedi. Our theme music is by Jim Brunberg and Ben Landsverk of Wonderly. Special thanks to Sam Dolnick, Mikayla Bouchard, Lauren Jackson, Julia Simon, Mahima Chablani, and Nora Keller. That’s it for “The Daily.” I’m Michael Barbaro. See you on Monday.California is part of a regional pact of Western states vowing to coordinate their reopening plans. On Monday, Colorado and Nevada joined the coalition. In the Northeast, New York and six other states are acting together as well.Workers say they are living in limbo as they watch other states reopen and worry about the risks of going back to work versus the bills piling up.In Nevada, where the stay-at-home order expires on Thursday, Deidra Young feels torn. Ms. Young was laid off from her job as a bartender at an Irish pub on the Vegas strip on St. Patrick’s Day. She wants to go back to work, but wondered whether it was worth the risk to stand in a half-empty bar and barely make the hourly $8.25 minimum wage.“If my work does call me, I honestly want to say no,” Ms. Young said. “But will I not get unemployment if I refuse?”It was an agonizing calculation, she said: “We all want to go back to work, but we don’t want to get sick.”Jack Healy reported from Denver, Manny Fernandez from Houston and Peter Baker from Washington. Reporting was contributed by Richard Fausset and Rick Rojas from Atlanta; Sarah Mervosh from Canton, Ohio; Sabrina Tavernise, Jonathan Martin, Jim Tankersley and Katie Benner from Washington; Patricia Mazzei from Miami; and Simon Romero from Albuquerque.Advertisement