https://www.nytimes.com/2020/03/19/well/live/coronavirus-blood-donation.html
How to Donate Blood - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
275
AdvertisementSupported byWhat you need to know about donating in a time of crisis.By Nancy WartikAs the coronavirus spread across the country, the nation’s blood supply faced a dire shortage. Blood drives were canceled when businesses closed, and many people feared going into donation centers. Thanks to a nationwide response, blood banks have recently filled up again.Donations will still be needed, however.“We’re grateful for the outpouring of support,” said Jodi Sheedy, a senior director of communications at the American Red Cross. “But we don’t know when the pandemic will end. Blood must be continuously replenished.”While coronavirus patients themselves don’t typically require blood, transfusions are necessary for cases such as trauma, organ transplants, complications of childbirth and more. Red blood cells remain viable only for 42 days, platelets for five.“The worst-case scenario could be a bleeding young patient who was in a car accident, and there’s no blood,” Dr. Pampee Young, chief medical officer of biomedical services at the American Red Cross, said last month. “That is the ultimate fear.”Check the A.A.B.B. (formerly the American Association of Blood Banks) locator, visit the Red Cross website, or call (800) RED-CROSS. You can also find information through the America’s Blood Centers website or call (202) 393-5725.If you can’t make an immediate appointment, don’t bow out! Make one for several weeks or months down the road, when supplies may dip again.Almost any healthy person can, although requirements may vary by state. Recently, the Food and Drug Administration loosened some restrictions, including making it easier for gay and bisexual men to donate.Talk to your local center about eligibility guidelines. In most states you have to be 17 years old and above; with parental consent, some states allow donors to be 16. You must weigh at least 110 pounds. There are no standing upper age limits.[LIVE UPDATES Read our live coverage of the coronavirus pandemic here.]Dr. Claudia Cohn, director of the Blood Bank Laboratory at the University of Minnesota and chief medical officer of A.A.B.B., said in an interview last month that normally, older Americans are the country’s best donors.“They give a disproportionate amount of blood,” Dr. Cohn said. “Even though we think their risk is very low, we want to protect them if they want to be careful about going out.”That means centers are asking younger people to step up and donate more than they usually do.“This is not a blood-borne disease, that is clear,” Dr. Cohn said. “Blood itself is safe.” Coronaviruses in general don’t seem to be blood transmissible, as evidence from earlier outbreaks of SARS and MERS has shown.“We completely understand people are hesitant,” said Dr. Young of the Red Cross. “We want to reassure the public that we’re handling this with an abundance of caution.”Red Cross blood centers have ramped up ordinary procedures, with staff members masked, gloved and conducting extra temperature checks, on both themselves and donors. All surfaces are repeatedly wiped down and donors are spaced six feet apart.“With centers taking extra measures to eliminate risk, it’s safer than going to the store,” Dr. Cohn said.Updated May 28, 2020States are reopening bit by bit. This means that more public spaces are available for use and more and more businesses are being allowed to open again. The federal government is largely leaving the decision up to states, and some state leaders are leaving the decision up to local authorities. Even if you aren’t being told to stay at home, it’s still a good idea to limit trips outside and your interaction with other people.Touching contaminated objects and then infecting ourselves with the germs is not typically how the virus spreads. But it can happen. A number of studies of flu, rhinovirus, coronavirus and other microbes have shown that respiratory illnesses, including the new coronavirus, can spread by touching contaminated surfaces, particularly in places like day care centers, offices and hospitals. But a long chain of events has to happen for the disease to spread that way. The best way to protect yourself from coronavirus — whether it’s surface transmission or close human contact — is still social distancing, washing your hands, not touching your face and wearing masks.Common symptoms include fever, a dry cough, fatigue and difficulty breathing or shortness of breath. Some of these symptoms overlap with those of the flu, making detection difficult, but runny noses and stuffy sinuses are less common. The C.D.C. has also added chills, muscle pain, sore throat, headache and a new loss of the sense of taste or smell as symptoms to look out for. Most people fall ill five to seven days after exposure, but symptoms may appear in as few as two days or as many as 14 days.If air travel is unavoidable, there are some steps you can take to protect yourself. Most important: Wash your hands often, and stop touching your face. If possible, choose a window seat. A study from Emory University found that during flu season, the safest place to sit on a plane is by a window, as people sitting in window seats had less contact with potentially sick people. Disinfect hard surfaces. When you get to your seat and your hands are clean, use disinfecting wipes to clean the hard surfaces at your seat like the head and arm rest, the seatbelt buckle, the remote, screen, seat back pocket and the tray table. If the seat is hard and nonporous or leather or pleather, you can wipe that down, too. (Using wipes on upholstered seats could lead to a wet seat and spreading of germs rather than killing them.)More than 40 million people — the equivalent of 1 in 4 U.S. workers — have filed for unemployment benefits since the pandemic took hold. One in five who were working in February reported losing a job or being furloughed in March or the beginning of April, data from a Federal Reserve survey released on May 14 showed, and that pain was highly concentrated among low earners. Fully 39 percent of former workers living in a household earning $40,000 or less lost work, compared with 13 percent in those making more than $100,000, a Fed official said.There is an uptick in people reporting symptoms of chilblains, which are painful red or purple lesions that typically appear in the winter on fingers or toes. The lesions are emerging as yet another symptom of infection with the new coronavirus. Chilblains are caused by inflammation in small blood vessels in reaction to cold or damp conditions, but they are usually common in the coldest winter months. Federal health officials do not include toe lesions in the list of coronavirus symptoms, but some dermatologists are pushing for a change, saying so-called Covid toe should be sufficient grounds for testing.Yes, but make sure you keep six feet of distance between you and people who don’t live in your home. Even if you just hang out in a park, rather than go for a jog or a walk, getting some fresh air, and hopefully sunshine, is a good idea.Taking one’s temperature to look for signs of fever is not as easy as it sounds, as “normal” temperature numbers can vary, but generally, keep an eye out for a temperature of 100.5 degrees Fahrenheit or higher. If you don’t have a thermometer (they can be pricey these days), there are other ways to figure out if you have a fever, or are at risk of Covid-19 complications.The C.D.C. has recommended that all Americans wear cloth masks if they go out in public. This is a shift in federal guidance reflecting new concerns that the coronavirus is being spread by infected people who have no symptoms. Until now, the C.D.C., like the W.H.O., has advised that ordinary people don’t need to wear masks unless they are sick and coughing. Part of the reason was to preserve medical-grade masks for health care workers who desperately need them at a time when they are in continuously short supply. Masks don’t replace hand washing and social distancing.If you’ve been exposed to the coronavirus or think you have, and have a fever or symptoms like a cough or difficulty breathing, call a doctor. They should give you advice on whether you should be tested, how to get tested, and how to seek medical treatment without potentially infecting or exposing others.If you’re sick and you think you’ve been exposed to the new coronavirus, the C.D.C. recommends that you call your healthcare provider and explain your symptoms and fears. They will decide if you need to be tested. Keep in mind that there’s a chance — because of a lack of testing kits or because you’re asymptomatic, for instance — you won’t be able to get tested.Charity Navigator, which evaluates charities using a numbers-based system, has a running list of nonprofits working in communities affected by the outbreak. You can give blood through the American Red Cross, and World Central Kitchen has stepped in to distribute meals in major cities.Yes.“The recommendations are to shelter in place except for essential things,” said Dr. Young. “Public health officials recognize that blood donation is essential and they’ve made an exception for it.”Yes, with some caveats.Your donation might actually be extra-valuable. So-called convalescent plasma — drawn from donors who’ve recovered from the disease — contains viral antibodies.“Antibody therapy holds promise for the treatment of current Covid-19 patients and it’s being tested now,” said Eduardo Nunes, a spokesman with the A.A.B.B. “Most centers prefer you to have been symptom-free for 28 days before donating.”You must meet certain other qualifications; for more information see the COVIDPlasma.org website.Advertisement