https://www.nytimes.com/2019/11/23/well/move/full-body-workout-jump-rope.html
A Do-Anywhere Full-Body Workout - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
328
AdvertisementSupported byIt can be done in barely 30 minutes in a hotel room, garage or even an airport lounge. All you need is a jump rope.By Gretchen ReynoldsHow can anybody fit in a simple, quick, full-body workout, anywhere?“Two words: Jump rope,” said Dr. Michael Joyner, an avid exerciser and physiologist at the Mayo Clinic in Rochester, Minn.In his usage, the phrase is both object and action. “I have a beautiful leather boxers’ jump rope my mother gave me when I was trying to become a more coordinated high-school basketball player,” he said. “When I travel and there is zero equipment, I find a place to do a series of calisthenics and jump rope.”[Need a jump rope? Wirecutter, the product recommendation company owned by The New York Times, has suggestions.]His regimen follows. It can be done in barely 30 minutes in a hotel room, spare bedroom, garage, porch, park, driveway or airport lounge, if you are uninhibited, he said. He does this in locker rooms during his sons’ swim meets.Ask a family member to cheer and time you and switch places at the end.5 minutes of jumping jacks and running in place4 minutes of squat thrusts. (Stand, bend your knees, crouch until your palms are flat on the floor, kick your legs back, straighten and repeat, like a burpee without the jump.)1 minute of jumping rope3 minutes of squat thrusts1 minute of jumping rope2 minutes of squat thrusts1 minute of jumping rope1 minute of squat thrusts1 minute of jumping rope20 push-ups or until your arms wobble1 minute of wall sitting. (Press your back against a wall, legs bent as if you were seated on a chair.)20 air squats or until your thighs burn. (From a standing position, bend your knees, spine straight and arms outstretched before you; squat as low as feels comfortable. Rise and repeat.)Repeat the last three exercises twice more, if possibleGasp and pass the jump rope to the next person in lineAdvertisement