https://www.nytimes.com/article/coronavirus-money-advice.html
Coronavirus and Your Money: The Answers to Your Questions - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
199
Advice on stocks, bonds and cash; timing the market; selling a house; whom to trust — and more.Credit...Illustration by Guillem Casasus; Photo: Getty ImagesSupported byBy Tara Siegel Bernard, Ann Carrns, Jeff Sommer and Ron LieberThe coronavirus is officially a pandemic. The bull market is officially over. None of us knows what comes next.It’s hard to make rational financial decisions when there’s so much uncertainty. We asked readers of the Your Money newsletter what most concerns them right now. Dozens sent questions, which we condensed and answered here:Harold Evensky, a longtime financial planner in Texas, had a blunt answer: “Going to cash could mean you will end up eating cat food five years from now.” Even in these times, most retirees still need a balanced portfolio of stock and bonds so their nest egg will keep up with inflation, and maybe even grow.But holding enough cash for basic needs is important, too. Mr. Evensky recommends thinking in terms of two cash buckets: The first can hold a year’s worth of living expenses. The second is for the big payments you’ll need over the next five years, like helping with a grandchild’s college tuition.With the money in those buckets already put aside, you may be able to ride out a shaky market more peacefully, using the returns from your investment portfolio to replenish the buckets as you use the cash you really need.We don’t know when the market will hit bottom, so hedge your bets: Invest a portion of your money over time. “Our brains do not respond well to panic and we will not be able to make rational decisions when everyone else is freaking out,” said Michael Batnick, director of research at Ritholtz Wealth Management. “You need to have a plan.”Let’s say you have an extra $5,000 you want to put to work. Set up an automatic investing schedule to take emotion out of the process — maybe you invest $500 every other Wednesday, for example. And if the market sinks further, try not to fret. Most of us are investing for the long term anyway.It depends. You might be able to shorten your loan term to 15 years from 30 and pay off your loan quicker. Your monthly payments would likely rise, but you would have more budget flexibility in retirement or even sooner.Or you could stick with a 30-year mortgage and lock in a lower rate. This would reduce your monthly payment, though you could end up paying more interest over time.Getting your hands on more cash might be your goal. You might keep your payment the same, start the 30-year clock over and walk away with some money for whatever is coming next. But lenders are overwhelmed, so prepare to devote many hours to loan shopping and closing.Maybe. If it’s pension-like income you’re craving, then something called a single-premium immediate annuity may help. You pay an insurance company a pile of cash, and in return, they send you a guaranteed monthly paycheck for the rest of your life (or some other period). Experts suggest figuring out what your basic fixed costs are — housing, food, taxes — and then buying enough of an income stream to cover the portion of expenses that Social Security does not.But the income received is tied to long-term interest rates, which have fallen to new lows. As a result, so-called payout rates have also fallen sharply. One workaround is to spread your purchase out — for example, by using a portion of your money to buy one annuity annually over five years.Another negative: Once you give that cash to the insurance company, you can’t access it. (You can buy a death benefit for your heirs, but that will reduce your income stream.)The supply of houses in most markets is tight and mortgage rates are low, which bodes well for sellers. That could shift, though, as the coronavirus spreads.Redfin, a brokerage, said home-buying demand has dropped in Seattle, which has been hard hit by COVID-19, but it hasn’t seen a falloff yet in the rest of the country. The National Association of Realtors put out a “flash survey” of its members March 9; 11 percent reported lower home buyer traffic and 7 percent reported lower home seller traffic.But the virus’s impact is changing so rapidly that we simply don’t know what’s coming next.First, a wag of the finger. Cash needed for a down payment or other near-term expenses, like college tuition, should not be in risky securities like stocks. Generally, investments should be used for long-term goals like retirement, because you have time to ride out market dips. Money needed in less than 10 years should be somewhere safer. “It should not have been there in the first place,” said Elissa Buie, a financial planner in San Francisco.But since it’s too late for that, she said — and assuming there’s no other source for the cash — it likely makes most sense to draw from the bonds. Stocks have obviously plummeted in recent weeks, so you can give them some time to recover. Pull from bonds. Their prices, which move in the opposite direction of interest rates, have lately been rising.Look at things dispassionately: Bonds are relatively expensive now, while stocks are cheaper than they were a few weeks ago. This is not an optimal time to buy bonds and sell stock.But if you want to retire soon on the money already in your portfolio, it might be reasonable to safeguard more of it, or even consider adding a cash buffer (see the first question). High quality bonds can be a haven.Updated May 28, 2020States are reopening bit by bit. This means that more public spaces are available for use and more and more businesses are being allowed to open again. The federal government is largely leaving the decision up to states, and some state leaders are leaving the decision up to local authorities. Even if you aren’t being told to stay at home, it’s still a good idea to limit trips outside and your interaction with other people.Touching contaminated objects and then infecting ourselves with the germs is not typically how the virus spreads. But it can happen. A number of studies of flu, rhinovirus, coronavirus and other microbes have shown that respiratory illnesses, including the new coronavirus, can spread by touching contaminated surfaces, particularly in places like day care centers, offices and hospitals. But a long chain of events has to happen for the disease to spread that way. The best way to protect yourself from coronavirus — whether it’s surface transmission or close human contact — is still social distancing, washing your hands, not touching your face and wearing masks.Common symptoms include fever, a dry cough, fatigue and difficulty breathing or shortness of breath. Some of these symptoms overlap with those of the flu, making detection difficult, but runny noses and stuffy sinuses are less common. The C.D.C. has also added chills, muscle pain, sore throat, headache and a new loss of the sense of taste or smell as symptoms to look out for. Most people fall ill five to seven days after exposure, but symptoms may appear in as few as two days or as many as 14 days.If air travel is unavoidable, there are some steps you can take to protect yourself. Most important: Wash your hands often, and stop touching your face. If possible, choose a window seat. A study from Emory University found that during flu season, the safest place to sit on a plane is by a window, as people sitting in window seats had less contact with potentially sick people. Disinfect hard surfaces. When you get to your seat and your hands are clean, use disinfecting wipes to clean the hard surfaces at your seat like the head and arm rest, the seatbelt buckle, the remote, screen, seat back pocket and the tray table. If the seat is hard and nonporous or leather or pleather, you can wipe that down, too. (Using wipes on upholstered seats could lead to a wet seat and spreading of germs rather than killing them.)More than 40 million people — the equivalent of 1 in 4 U.S. workers — have filed for unemployment benefits since the pandemic took hold. One in five who were working in February reported losing a job or being furloughed in March or the beginning of April, data from a Federal Reserve survey released on May 14 showed, and that pain was highly concentrated among low earners. Fully 39 percent of former workers living in a household earning $40,000 or less lost work, compared with 13 percent in those making more than $100,000, a Fed official said.There is an uptick in people reporting symptoms of chilblains, which are painful red or purple lesions that typically appear in the winter on fingers or toes. The lesions are emerging as yet another symptom of infection with the new coronavirus. Chilblains are caused by inflammation in small blood vessels in reaction to cold or damp conditions, but they are usually common in the coldest winter months. Federal health officials do not include toe lesions in the list of coronavirus symptoms, but some dermatologists are pushing for a change, saying so-called Covid toe should be sufficient grounds for testing.Yes, but make sure you keep six feet of distance between you and people who don’t live in your home. Even if you just hang out in a park, rather than go for a jog or a walk, getting some fresh air, and hopefully sunshine, is a good idea.Taking one’s temperature to look for signs of fever is not as easy as it sounds, as “normal” temperature numbers can vary, but generally, keep an eye out for a temperature of 100.5 degrees Fahrenheit or higher. If you don’t have a thermometer (they can be pricey these days), there are other ways to figure out if you have a fever, or are at risk of Covid-19 complications.The C.D.C. has recommended that all Americans wear cloth masks if they go out in public. This is a shift in federal guidance reflecting new concerns that the coronavirus is being spread by infected people who have no symptoms. Until now, the C.D.C., like the W.H.O., has advised that ordinary people don’t need to wear masks unless they are sick and coughing. Part of the reason was to preserve medical-grade masks for health care workers who desperately need them at a time when they are in continuously short supply. Masks don’t replace hand washing and social distancing.If you’ve been exposed to the coronavirus or think you have, and have a fever or symptoms like a cough or difficulty breathing, call a doctor. They should give you advice on whether you should be tested, how to get tested, and how to seek medical treatment without potentially infecting or exposing others.If you’re sick and you think you’ve been exposed to the new coronavirus, the C.D.C. recommends that you call your healthcare provider and explain your symptoms and fears. They will decide if you need to be tested. Keep in mind that there’s a chance — because of a lack of testing kits or because you’re asymptomatic, for instance — you won’t be able to get tested.Charity Navigator, which evaluates charities using a numbers-based system, has a running list of nonprofits working in communities affected by the outbreak. You can give blood through the American Red Cross, and World Central Kitchen has stepped in to distribute meals in major cities.If you truly need the money to live, do whatever you have to do. That said, if your employer matches your contributions at some level, try to get that free money.You’ll be better off down the road if you keep salting away as much as you are permitted in that tax-sheltered account, assuming it is invested in a diversified way. So unless you face a real emergency, try not to stop saving entirely.But if the market plunge has taught you that your risk tolerance isn’t as high as you once thought it was, dialing back your stock allocation may help you ride out storms like these.Be especially careful during periods of market turbulence. Many professionals who call themselves financial advisers are glorified salespeople, peddling stuff you don’t need.Start by asking this question: “Will you act as a fiduciary?” That means the adviser must put your interests ahead of his or her own. The pros most likely to serve as fiduciaries are certified financial planners, who are also registered advisers.You want someone who charges an hourly rate or another type of flat fee. Avoid advisers who only earn money when they sell you something. Many pros who work that way can be found here: XY Planning Network; Garrett Planning Network; The National Association of Personal Financial Advisors.Money-market mutual funds were always widely assumed to be safe places to store cash. But during the financial crisis, one fund told investors its shares were no longer worth $1, but a few pennies less. Investors panicked, and the government stepped in to stop a run on the funds.Bank and money-market experts said they believed that isn’t likely to happen again. Want an explicit guarantee? Stick with a traditional bank account (or a money market deposit account, which is different from a money-market fund) that is backed by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, which means your money is insured by the federal government, up to certain limits.Have more questions? Subscribe to the Your Money newsletter.Advertisement