https://www.nytimes.com/2018/02/27/us/politics/parkland-gun-control-politics-midterms.html
Parkland Massacre Thrusts Guns Into the Midterm Spotlight - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
132
AdvertisementSupported bytranscript“We want change, we want change ...” “I don’t understand why I could still go in a store and buy a weapon of war.” “There’s no better time than now to talk about gun control.” These are calls the American public has heard before. After Orlando — “Democrats and Republicans we spoke with agree, suspected terrorists, like the Orlando shooter, should not be allowed to purchase firearms.” After Sandy Hook — “90 percent of Americans support universal background checks.” After each mass shooting, there’s a surge of public support for stricter gun control. “A new poll from Quinnipiac University shows record high support for stricter gun laws.” So why hasn’t Washington put stricter gun laws on the books? There are several factors, ranging from partisan divides to gun owner activism to the N.R.A.’s political clout. No. 1: There’s broad support, but also big divisions on gun control. The most comprehensive data is from 2017, and it shows that 60 percent of Americans say they want stricter gun laws. Support is even higher for things like a 30-day waiting period for gun sales and universal background checks. But dig deeper, and you find the devil is in the details — and the divides. Most Democratic voters want stricter gun laws. But less than 1 in 4 Republicans agree. Most Americans who don’t own firearms say easy access to legal guns fuels gun violence. Fewer than half of gun owners agree. Non-owners want to ban assault-style weapons, while most gun owners don’t. “The person is the criminal, not the weapon.” Gun owners may be a minority, but they’re a very focused and vocal minority. Only about 3 in 10 Americans own a gun. But to them, gun control is not merely a policy issue — it’s personal. Nearly 40 percent say they always have a loaded firearm at the ready in their home. 74 percent say the right to own a gun is “essential” to their freedom. Gun owners are much more likely to contact lawmakers about gun policy, compared to non-owners, and far more likely to donate to gun advocacy and policy groups. No. 3: The N.R.A. is a formidable force in politics. Less than 20 percent of gun owners in America say they belong to the N.R.A., but it’s big enough, and disciplined enough, to turn elections and to end political careers. Part of what makes the N.R.A. so formidable is the money it spends helping friendly politicians and attacking those deemed enemies. “Ross voted against your gun rights.” The N.R.A.’s vast marketing efforts have helped turn gun ownership into a badge of cultural identity. “It is not about politics. It is a way of life. I feel like we should be able to express that.” And their catchphrases have become ubiquitous. ”You know, the guns don’t kill people,” people kill people.” No. 4: The N.R.A.’s leaders are more hard-line than its members. Polls show that N.R.A. members do support some gun control policies, like outlawing sales to the mentally ill and people on terror watch lists. Most also favor universal background checks. But time and time again, N.R.A. leaders in Washington work to kill these proposals. After Sandy Hook, N.R.A. leaders flipped the script on mass shootings. Instead of combating calls for new gun control, they actually demanded more gun rights. “The only thing that stops a bad guy with a gun is a good guy with a gun.” And finally, No. 5: Are Americans really clamoring for more gun control? Maybe not. We see spikes and public support for stricter laws in the wake of mass shootings like Columbine, Sandy Hook and Las Vegas. But in a matter of weeks, the bumps fade. In fact, overall Americans have actually grown less supportive of gun control over the past 25 years. The shootings, meanwhile, continue.By Jonathan Martin and Alexander BurnsWASHINGTON — In Minnesota, a Democratic candidate for governor with rural roots is running from his past affiliation with the National Rifle Association. In South Florida, endangered House Republicans are embracing an assault weapons ban.And in Ohio, the moderate Democratic candidate for governor, feeling heat from his left, is embracing a more stringent gun-violence platform than his past relations with the N.R.A. would suggest.The mass shooting at Marjory Stoneman Douglas High School in Parkland, Fla., has thrust gun rights into the midterm campaign, scrambling traditions in both parties as the debate shifts toward firearms restrictions.A host of House Republicans and a handful of the party’s governors are beginning to distance themselves from their party’s gun-rights orthodoxy, signaling an openness to restrictions that reflects the rising anger among suburban voters. But Democrats are under even more pressure from within to recalibrate their position on the issue. Even as they attempt to reclaim governorships and congressional seats in red-tinged regions, moderates recognize that bearing the mark of the N.R.A. could be fatal in their primaries.“I’ve always respected law-abiding citizens’ right to be responsible gun owners and many people in Ohio feel strongly about that,” said Richard Cordray, the leading Democratic candidate for governor in Ohio and former head of the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau, who first must beat the left-wing candidate, Dennis Kucinich, for the nomination. “But I also think people with their eyes and ears open are seeing some of these tragedies, of all different kinds in our society, and thinking we need to do more.”In recent years, both major parties have honored something of a nonaggression pact. As the Republican Party’s moderates thinned out, few Republicans strayed from the gun-rights line, and Democrats in competitive regions deliberately avoided making guns central, fearing that it was far more of a voting issue for gun advocates than gun control supporters. In Congress and in most states, gun policy was largely kept off the legislative agenda.But with mass shootings becoming agonizingly routine, and Americans demanding action after 17 Florida teenagers and faculty members were murdered on Valentine’s Day, this election may be more like 1994, when an assault weapons ban thrust guns to the fore.“This is a tipping point,” said Gov. Jay Inslee of Washington State, the head of the Democratic Governors Association and one of those lawmakers who lost his House seat after voting for the 1994 ban. “I think what people are looking for is more independent thought and less slavish devotion to the N.R.A.”On the Republican side, Gov. Bill Haslam of Tennessee, who runs the Republican Governors Association but does not have to run again, gave his party a blunt warning about the political challenge staring it in the face: voters “particularly among suburban women,” are mobilizing for gun control.“When you have something put into stark dramatization like Florida, then I think that gets people’s attention. And they say, ‘There’s got to be certain things we can do,’” said Mr. Haslam, who called for raising the age limit on gun purchases over the N.R.A.’s opposition.Yet it was not at all clear whether Congress will take up a gun control measure anytime soon. Before a planned bipartisan gun summit meeting on Wednesday at the White House, Speaker Paul D. Ryan told reporters on Tuesday that “we shouldn’t be banning guns for law-abiding citizens.”He indicated that lawmakers would focus on narrow measures and added, “We also want to make sure that we protect people’s due process rights and legal constitutional rights while making sure that people who should not get guns don’t get them.”The political peril for each party lies in divergent parts of the country: For Republicans, ignoring voters’ fears about gun violence could take a pronounced toll in the House, where the party is defending several dozen districts around major cities — including Philadelphia, Chicago, Los Angeles and San Diego — where Mr. Trump is deeply disliked and the N.R.A. has little following to speak of.On the Democratic side, it is in the more rural states — key to Democrats’ hopes in Senate and governors’ races — where Democratic supporters of gun rights have scrambled to react. In some cases, the rapidly shifting conversation on guns has collided with primary elections that party leaders like Mr. Inslee are hoping do not grow too nasty.In 2018, Democrats’ ability to compete in statewide elections in the Midwest and in the South may depend on candidates’ ability to court gun owners, many of whom fiercely oppose new regulations. Until recently, liberal Democrats largely tolerated such overtures as a political necessity. Just last week, Conor Lamb, a Democrat running a tenacious special election campaign in a conservative House district in southwestern Pennsylvania, rebuffed calls for new gun laws after the Parkland shooting.When a gunman walked into a Florida school on Feb. 14, his rifle let him fire in much the same way that many American soldiers and Marines would fire M16 and M4 rifles in combat.But the grim spectacle of students, churchgoers and concert attendees being killed by individuals wielding military-style semiautomatic rifles has mobilized gun control advocates in a new way — and pushed even red- and purple-state Democrats to move abruptly in their direction.Some who have in the past sought to placate the N.R.A. are now attempting to make amends with the left: In Minnesota, Representative Tim Walz, a Democratic candidate for governor embroiled in a contested primary, posted an apologetic note on Facebook after the Parkland shooting, endorsing an assault weapons ban and acknowledging “criticisms from those who take issue with my past campaign contributions from the N.R.A.”Mr. Walz, a military veteran from rural southern Minnesota whom the N.R.A. has endorsed in the past, said he is now determined to “get the N.R.A. out of the way, and get us to the common-sense solutions that we all agree on.”But his Democratic opponents see an opening.“It has become a huge issue,” said Rebecca Otto, the Democratic state auditor. “The only thing that has changed about Congressman Walz is he’s now running for governor.”In South Carolina, State Representative James Smith, the front-runner for the Democratic nomination for governor, has faced attacks in the primary race from a businessman, Phil Noble, for having received an “A” rating from the N.R.A. for several years. In Ohio, Mr. Cordray unveiled a more stringent gun violence platform last week amid criticism from Mr. Kucinich of his past relationship with the N.R.A.Mr. Cordray said in an interview that the Parkland shooting had prompted a reassessment of existing policies even among people who back broader gun rights. He has called for greatly expanded background checks and said lawmakers should “rethink” regulation of assault weapons, stopping short of demanding an outright ban. Mr. Cordray also cautioned that there are many voters in rural areas who “feel strongly about the Second Amendment and their right to have guns for hunting, for self-defense.”In Florida, Gwen Graham, whose primary political calling card has been her ability to win over Republican voters, wasted no time calling for new gun regulations after the Parkland shooting, including a suspension on sales of AR-15 rifles. But Ms. Graham, who previously represented a conservative stretch of the state’s panhandle in Congress, will surely face scrutiny in her primary for making more pro-gun comments when she was a congressional candidate facing opposition from the N.R.A.Even before the Florida shooting, however, the ranks of staunchly N.R.A.-aligned Democrats had dwindled to the point of near-extinction. After the party’s losses in the 2010 and 2014 elections, only a small group of Democrats from rural, solidly Republican areas remain in Congress. Of the five Senate Democrats who voted against a 2013 bill to expand background checks for gun purchasers, just one — Heidi Heitkamp of North Dakota — is still in office.But even in Texas, which has a gun culture that can be traced to its founding, the tide in the party is running clearly in the direction of gun restrictions. Representative Beto O’Rourke of Texas, a Democrat challenging Senator Ted Cruz, acknowledged his support for banning assault weapons would probably not poll well.But, he said, “You’ve got to do what’s right, and people need to know where you are on these issues.”On the Republican side, uniformity on the gun issue has been just as pronounced. Only three Senate Republicans still in office voted for the 2013 background-check bill, drafted by Senators Joe Manchin III, Democrat of West Virginia, and Patrick J. Toomey, Republican of Pennsylvania, after the December 2012 massacre at Sandy Hook Elementary School in Newtown, Conn.Yet the Florida shooting has plainly caused some Republicans to rethink the issue, or at least to buy time until they can assess whether this latest outcry will fade.In New Jersey, Jay Webber, a Republican state legislator who is running to succeed Representative Rodney Frelinghuysen, a retiring Republican, said voters are demanding an “open” conversation on guns. “There’s certainly a desire to do something,” said Mr. Webber, who has been backed by gun-rights activists in the past.But a number of Republicans facing contested primaries and courting the right have lurched in the other direction, in some cases even targeting their ostensible business allies. In Georgia, for instance, Lt. Gov. Casey Cagle, a Republican candidate for governor, threatened to retaliate against Delta Air Lines for terminating a discount deal with N.R.A. members.A handful of congressional Republicans have made more determined gestures in the direction of gun regulation over the past two weeks. Representative Brian Mast of Florida, a Republican from near Parkland, and Carlos Curbelo, an endangered Republican in Miami, endorsed an assault weapons ban. Five Republicans from competitive districts are sponsoring a Democratic bill to authorize federal research into gun violence.Sometimes, said Gov. Ralph S. Northam of Virginia, who ran unapologetically on gun control and routed his Republican rival last year, “You have to be slapped in the face.”Advertisement