https://www.nytimes.com/2020/05/14/us/college-coronavirus-fall.html
Coronavirus Could Create a Hodgepodge of Campus Life in the Fall - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
175
AdvertisementSupported byThe nation’s largest public university system will stay online, but other colleges are determined to bring back students. The patchwork could look much like the rest of the country.By Shawn HublerSACRAMENTO — Fall will be quiet this year at San Diego State University. No big lecture classes. No parking lots packed with commuting students. No campus hubbub around Greek life, and perhaps no pep rallies for the Aztecs football team.As one of the 23 schools in the enormous California State University system, San Diego State will hold classes primarily online, a decision the system’s chancellor announced this week.But 20 minutes up the freeway at the University of California, San Diego, things could look very different, with tens of thousands of students streaming back to campus, if only to single dorm rooms and socially distanced classrooms.Across the country this fall, college life is likely to be vastly different from campus to campus — a patchwork that mirrors what is currently happening in states and communities, as some move toward widespread reopening and others keep their economies mostly closed.Shut down in a stricken wave this March as the coronavirus pandemic spread across America, colleges and universities are now studying whether and how to move forward, with plans ranging wildly between hope and grim epidemiology.The University of Washington was one of the first large schools to make the shift to online classes after the Seattle area emerged as an early center of the outbreak. Now, it is developing plans to allow at least some in-person instruction, a spokesman said.And in a state that has moved aggressively toward reopening, the University of Georgia has announced plans for in-person classes.But Harvard Medical School said on Wednesday that its first-year students would start remotely in the fall. A handful of other schools, mostly small ones, have said they are leaning toward online-only classes, including Wayne State University in Detroit, a virus hot spot, and Sierra College outside Sacramento.Most other college and universities, though, have painted optimistic pictures about reopening, hoping to avoid immense drops in enrollment and tuition revenue. But they are privately making plans for remote-learning alternatives if necessary.At U.C. San Diego, hope rests on a pilot project for mass testing of students during the summer session. If new coronavirus cases can be quickly isolated and traced, the reasoning goes, many of the university’s 40,000 students can return in the fall.“This is completely uncharted territory, and there is no clear indication of what is the right answer,” said the school’s chancellor, Pradeep Khosla. “Universities have all sorts of models. Some will come back in person, some remote, some only hybrid. People are making choices based on their situations and on what makes them comfortable.”Like the rest of the country, colleges face formidable risks, both human and economic. Students and faculty members must be kept safe and healthy, but so must a segment of the economy that employs nearly four million people and operates as the nation’s predominant social mobility engine.Even before the pandemic, college enrollment was on the decline nationwide as soaring tuition and student debt raised questions about the worth of a college education. Now many colleges are in critical condition, as the coronavirus has stalled the economy, gutted state budgets, cratered endowments and made heading off to college seem less an adventure than a threat.Cal State, the nation’s largest four-year public university system, this week became the first large institution in the country to tell students their classes would take place almost exclusively online this fall, with some possible exceptions for clinical classes in the nursing program or certain science labs.But the choice for those schools is arguably less complex than at the large research universities that make up the University of California system.Most of the nearly 500,000 Cal State students are undergraduates whose coursework includes large lecture classes that are more adaptable to remote learning. At many Cal States, as they are known, 80 percent or more of the students live off-campus.Testing all of those students regularly, as Mr. Khosla hopes to do at U.C. San Diego, would be cost prohibitive — about $25 million a week, Timothy P. White, the system’s chancellor, told the Cal State board of trustees on Tuesday.Not that it will be cheap at U.C. San Diego. Mr. Khosla said it would cost about $500,000 to test about 5,000 mostly graduate students once a month during the summer pilot program. But it could cost “north of $2 million a month” for the whole campus starting in the fall.“It’s an expensive experiment, there’s no doubt about it,” Mr. Khosla said. But the school’s willingness to try shows how important it is for universities to offer students an on-campus experience, which generates a significant portion of an institution’s revenue through everything from room and board to dining hall charges.Higher education experts said the decision on whether to hold in-person classes in the fall would most likely depend on a number of factors, including the type of institution, location, size of the student body and funding.“States are in different circumstances in terms of the proliferation of the virus, and also the funding they receive,” said Lynn Pasquerella, the president of the Association of American Colleges and Universities.Small, cash-rich colleges may be better able to afford to go back, with masks, social distancing and extra sanitation. And schools in rural areas without major outbreaks may consider themselves less at risk.Institutions with aging faculty members and more students who already live off-campus or take more online courses could opt for a longer stretch of remote learning.Updated May 28, 2020States are reopening bit by bit. This means that more public spaces are available for use and more and more businesses are being allowed to open again. The federal government is largely leaving the decision up to states, and some state leaders are leaving the decision up to local authorities. Even if you aren’t being told to stay at home, it’s still a good idea to limit trips outside and your interaction with other people.Touching contaminated objects and then infecting ourselves with the germs is not typically how the virus spreads. But it can happen. A number of studies of flu, rhinovirus, coronavirus and other microbes have shown that respiratory illnesses, including the new coronavirus, can spread by touching contaminated surfaces, particularly in places like day care centers, offices and hospitals. But a long chain of events has to happen for the disease to spread that way. The best way to protect yourself from coronavirus — whether it’s surface transmission or close human contact — is still social distancing, washing your hands, not touching your face and wearing masks.Common symptoms include fever, a dry cough, fatigue and difficulty breathing or shortness of breath. Some of these symptoms overlap with those of the flu, making detection difficult, but runny noses and stuffy sinuses are less common. The C.D.C. has also added chills, muscle pain, sore throat, headache and a new loss of the sense of taste or smell as symptoms to look out for. Most people fall ill five to seven days after exposure, but symptoms may appear in as few as two days or as many as 14 days.If air travel is unavoidable, there are some steps you can take to protect yourself. Most important: Wash your hands often, and stop touching your face. If possible, choose a window seat. A study from Emory University found that during flu season, the safest place to sit on a plane is by a window, as people sitting in window seats had less contact with potentially sick people. Disinfect hard surfaces. When you get to your seat and your hands are clean, use disinfecting wipes to clean the hard surfaces at your seat like the head and arm rest, the seatbelt buckle, the remote, screen, seat back pocket and the tray table. If the seat is hard and nonporous or leather or pleather, you can wipe that down, too. (Using wipes on upholstered seats could lead to a wet seat and spreading of germs rather than killing them.)More than 40 million people — the equivalent of 1 in 4 U.S. workers — have filed for unemployment benefits since the pandemic took hold. One in five who were working in February reported losing a job or being furloughed in March or the beginning of April, data from a Federal Reserve survey released on May 14 showed, and that pain was highly concentrated among low earners. Fully 39 percent of former workers living in a household earning $40,000 or less lost work, compared with 13 percent in those making more than $100,000, a Fed official said.There is an uptick in people reporting symptoms of chilblains, which are painful red or purple lesions that typically appear in the winter on fingers or toes. The lesions are emerging as yet another symptom of infection with the new coronavirus. Chilblains are caused by inflammation in small blood vessels in reaction to cold or damp conditions, but they are usually common in the coldest winter months. Federal health officials do not include toe lesions in the list of coronavirus symptoms, but some dermatologists are pushing for a change, saying so-called Covid toe should be sufficient grounds for testing.Yes, but make sure you keep six feet of distance between you and people who don’t live in your home. Even if you just hang out in a park, rather than go for a jog or a walk, getting some fresh air, and hopefully sunshine, is a good idea.Taking one’s temperature to look for signs of fever is not as easy as it sounds, as “normal” temperature numbers can vary, but generally, keep an eye out for a temperature of 100.5 degrees Fahrenheit or higher. If you don’t have a thermometer (they can be pricey these days), there are other ways to figure out if you have a fever, or are at risk of Covid-19 complications.The C.D.C. has recommended that all Americans wear cloth masks if they go out in public. This is a shift in federal guidance reflecting new concerns that the coronavirus is being spread by infected people who have no symptoms. Until now, the C.D.C., like the W.H.O., has advised that ordinary people don’t need to wear masks unless they are sick and coughing. Part of the reason was to preserve medical-grade masks for health care workers who desperately need them at a time when they are in continuously short supply. Masks don’t replace hand washing and social distancing.If you’ve been exposed to the coronavirus or think you have, and have a fever or symptoms like a cough or difficulty breathing, call a doctor. They should give you advice on whether you should be tested, how to get tested, and how to seek medical treatment without potentially infecting or exposing others.If you’re sick and you think you’ve been exposed to the new coronavirus, the C.D.C. recommends that you call your healthcare provider and explain your symptoms and fears. They will decide if you need to be tested. Keep in mind that there’s a chance — because of a lack of testing kits or because you’re asymptomatic, for instance — you won’t be able to get tested.Charity Navigator, which evaluates charities using a numbers-based system, has a running list of nonprofits working in communities affected by the outbreak. You can give blood through the American Red Cross, and World Central Kitchen has stepped in to distribute meals in major cities.“I think we are going to see a lot of variation,” said Laura W. Perna, a professor at the Graduate School of Education at the University of Pennsylvania.Still, the pressure on many institutions to open will be great, if for potentially different reasons.At community colleges, for example, many students also rely on campus resources for access to the internet, food and child care. “Students are now in parking lots in order to get remote access to their classes online,” Dr. Pasquerella said.At the same time, she said, private liberal arts colleges will want to bring students back because the cost of tuition is often premised on the added value of a rigorous, close-knit campus environment.Without revenue from sporting events, bookstores, summer camps and campus parking, even large, powerhouse universities may find themselves hurting for cash. Penn State, for example, has projected losses of at least $260 million over the next 14 months because of the coronavirus. The university has said it hopes to resume in-person classes by autumn.In California, which was among the earliest states to shut down, Mr. Khosla said that if any campus could responsibly open, it would be U.C. San Diego. The campus has two teaching hospitals and some of the nation’s leading experts in epidemiology and infectious disease.And, he said, there are opportunities in crisis.“This is a research institution,” Mr. Khosla said. “What we learn could teach us a lot about how to manage pandemics like this.”Sarah Mervosh contributed reporting from Canton, Ohio, and Mike Baker from Seattle.Advertisement