https://www.nytimes.com/2020/04/18/health/coronavirus-america-future.html
The Coronavirus in America: The Year Ahead - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
235
There will be no quick return to our previous lives, according to nearly two dozen experts. But there is hope for managing the scourge now and in the long term.A tent in an outdoor I.C.U. hospital in Central Park.Credit...Misha Friedman for The New York TimesSupported byBy Donald G. McNeil Jr.To hear more audio stories from publishers, like The New York Times, download Audm for iPhone or Android.The coronavirus is spreading from America’s biggest cities to its suburbs, and has begun encroaching on the nation’s rural regions. The virus is believed to have infected millions of citizens and has killed more than 34,000.Yet President Trump this week proposed guidelines for reopening the economy and suggested that a swath of the United States would soon resume something resembling normalcy. For weeks now, the administration’s view of the crisis and our future has been rosier than that of its own medical advisers, and of scientists generally.In truth, it is not clear to anyone where this crisis is leading us. More than 20 experts in public health, medicine, epidemiology and history shared their thoughts on the future during in-depth interviews. When can we emerge from our homes? How long, realistically, before we have a treatment or vaccine? How will we keep the virus at bay?Some felt that American ingenuity, once fully engaged, might well produce advances to ease the burdens. The path forward depends on factors that are certainly difficult but doable, they said: a carefully staggered approach to reopening, widespread testing and surveillance, a treatment that works, adequate resources for health care providers — and eventually an effective vaccine.Still, it was impossible to avoid gloomy forecasts for the next year. The scenario that Mr. Trump has been unrolling at his daily press briefings — that the lockdowns will end soon, that a protective pill is almost at hand, that football stadiums and restaurants will soon be full — is a fantasy, most experts said.“We face a doleful future,” said Dr. Harvey V. Fineberg, a former president of the National Academy of Medicine.He and others foresaw an unhappy population trapped indoors for months, with the most vulnerable possibly quarantined for far longer. They worried that a vaccine would initially elude scientists, that weary citizens would abandon restrictions despite the risks, that the virus would be with us from now on.“My optimistic side says the virus will ease off in the summer and a vaccine will arrive like the cavalry,” said Dr. William Schaffner, a preventive medicine specialist at Vanderbilt University medical school. “But I’m learning to guard against my essentially optimistic nature.”Most experts believed that once the crisis was over, the nation and its economy would revive quickly. But there would be no escaping a period of intense pain.Exactly how the pandemic will end depends in part on medical advances still to come. It will also depend on how individual Americans behave in the interim. If we scrupulously protect ourselves and our loved ones, more of us will live. If we underestimate the virus, it will find us.transcriptFrom The New York Times, I’m Michael Barbaro. This is “The Daily.”Today: As President Trump urges states to begin reopening their economies, a debate begins over when and how to end the lockdowns. Science reporter Donald G. McNeil Jr. on what that might look like.It’s Monday, April 20.So Donald, we have come to you at just about every turn in this pandemic to understand what’s next, and the portraits of the future that you have painted for us each time we talk have been strikingly accurate. You told us all the way back in February to prepare for lockdowns. Those happened. You told us to prepare for high death rates. You said that people we know would die, and that, sadly, has happened. You warned us of shortages of medical supplies. That too has happened. Just about everything you said would happen has more or less happened. So I want to turn to the next installment of this rolling conversation we’ve been having with you.OK.And start with a question that I think is on everyone’s mind right now, which is when and how we start to reopen our society and what that would look like.OK. Well, look, I’m not some dark angel who’s simply looking into the future.Understood.I’m talking to experts. I’m looking at the other pandemics I’ve covered. I’m talking to medical historians and making predictions based on data. And so I think a lot of people think that by May or June or August, we’re going to return to something like normalcy. But all the experts I talk to say, no, that’s a fantasy.Why is it a fantasy?Well, because if we all tried to come out at once, everything would look cool for about three weeks. And a week or two after that the emergency rooms would start to fill again, and people would start to die again. Flattening the curve is a notion that people love, but when we say we’re flattening the curve, no, we’re plateauing at a very high level of the curve. That means a steady rate of deaths. So what we want is to see the lockdown last until we get back down to close to what the normal baseline rate of deaths is. And it’s going to be piece by piece. We might be able to let a certain number of people ride the subway each day. People still staying apart from each other. We’re not going to be able to let people sit next to each other in football stadiums. Maybe the team will play on the field, and there will be some cameramen in the stands, but it’s not going to be the way it was before.OK. So if there’s not going to be any kind of single moment where the curtain goes up and life resumes, what does a lifting of these lockdowns start to look like?Well, the best description I heard of it was in an article. It was on March 19, by Tomas Pueyo, a writer in San Francisco. And it was called “The Hammer and the Dance.” And the hammer is the lockdown. There was no question of social distancing light. It was more like, bam, everybody has to go into their houses. But then, once you get the deaths down to a minimum, then you begin the dance. And the dance is dancing a little bit out, and opening up some of the restrictions and seeing, you know, how far can you let people go. And then you see what that does to death rates. And once the death rates go up, you have to go back and leave the dance floor and go into lockdown again. And it repeats again and again. And it’s dance in, dance out, dance in, dance out. And basically that’s what the epidemiological models show we have to do.So in this scenario, tiptoeing back to normal happens, and if there is a resurgence in infections, then the hammer comes back down.Exactly.So let’s talk about what the opening starts to look like. Describe the dance.OK. So the dance is you have this whole list of things you can ask people to do. One of them being wear masks. Another one is sit six feet apart from your dining companions at a restaurant. So a restaurant that had 100 customers before now has about 10 customers in it. You have to cut down travel between cities, because people from a hot zone, like New York recently, could go to a cool zone and start infections. International travelers will have to be quarantined for 14 days so that we’re sure they’re not infected when they come in. So we will have to find restrictions on people’s movements that keeps them from getting too close and letting the virus spread again. Because when the virus spreads, deaths follow.OK. Let’s get a little more specific here. What does the dance mean for, let’s say, schools?Well, schools is a big mystery, because we don’t know much about the virus in children. Very, very few children get hospitalized and die. It happens, but it’s very uncommon. But the question is, how much do the kids get the virus and transmit the virus? Because if you open schools, the children may be fine, but the teachers won’t necessarily be, and the children’s parents and grandparents won’t be. So mayors and governors are going to have to decide, maybe we’re going to open school for two weeks and see what happens? Or maybe we’re going to let half the kids go to school this week but have them sitting six feet apart, and then next week the other half of the kids get to come to school.And Donald, what about the typical workplace. From the way you’re describing schools, it sounds like, at the very least, people at an office or a factory would need to be six feet apart. What else?Well, it depends on what you mean by the average workplace. Are you a construction crew? Are you an office, like The New York Times? Are you a factory? Are you a food processing plant? Everyone is different. And for those of us who work most of the day on computers, there’s not a whole lot of reason to go back to the workplace. It may be more of a source of danger than any advantage you get from being there. Whereas if you work in a chicken processing plant, you’ve got to be near the chickens. So somehow they’re going to have to stretch out those chicken disassembly lines, so that people can do it safely without infecting each other. And they’ll have to wear masks, and maybe there’ll be plexiglass between the workers. There’s lots of measures you can take, and they’re going to be different for every single workplace.I want to talk for just a moment about geography, because I wonder if the scenarios you’re describing would apply as rigorously in one part of, for example, the United States as another, based on issues like density or the cycle of this virus. There are many places in the United States that have been largely untouched by this virus. Or there are places like Washington state, where it seems the virus has turned a corner. So would this hammer and dance scenario apply in the same way to every corner of the country? Or could it be applied more lightly or more severely, based on density, based on number of infections?Yes and no. It’s a fantasy to believe that there are any parts of the country that are untouched by this virus. It is much more intense in some places, like New York and New Orleans and Detroit, but it’s everywhere. If you look at any map of cases, it’s certainly in every state. It’s in multiple counties in every state. So it’s going to have to be different techniques developed, not just for every state in every county, but for every work situation, so that you are not transmitting virus to each other.Donald, is the point of the hammer and the dance to avoid having the rest of the country get infected, or does it simply slow a inevitable version of mass infection but not prevent it?It slows it down. A certain amount of infection is inevitable, because emergency workers are going to have to be at their jobs. Medical workers are going to get infected. There’s going to be a certain level of infection at all times, but you want to damp it down to the minimum. But all the models say that maybe 3 percent of America is infected by now. The other epidemiologists think maybe it’s 10 percent. That 10 percent is a pretty high guess. So that still leaves 300 million Americans uninfected. So we’re a country that’s somewhere north of 90 percent susceptible. And each time we do the dance out and dance in, we chop a few more people off that susceptible list. A few of them are dead. A bunch of them become immune. But it only proceeds in fits and starts. Maybe we go three million at a time, three million at a time, three million at a time. It’s not a fast process.And how long do the experts you talked to say that this dance will need to occur? At some point, do we stop dancing and we just get to go back to normal?The dance will end when we have a vaccine that we can all take, or if we have a prophylactic pill that will protect us all, like PrEP protects you from HIV. Or when so many of us would become infected — 70-plus percent have become infected, and the virus dies out or slows down just because it can’t find any new victims to infect.Mm-hmm.But making a vaccine within 18 months is extremely optimistic. The record we’ve ever had for producing a vaccine is four years. That was a mumps vaccine produced back in the ‘50s. We’ve got new techniques that speed it up, but some things can’t be sped up. And then after we design the vaccine, we have to think about producing the vaccine. If we need 300 million doses of vaccine, or if we need two shots — if we need 600 million doses of vaccine — that’s a gigantic undertaking. I talked to some vaccine production experts, and they said, the average vaccine plant in America makes 5 to 10 million doses. So we’ve got to find some way to make 300 to 600 million doses of vaccine, and we have to start planning now, even before the vaccine exists.Donald, you just said that the record for making a vaccine is four years. Are you saying that there is a version of this where this dance, in the hammer and dance metaphor, goes on not for one year but something like four years?That’s a kind of worst case scenario, as far as timing is concerned. Everything may get lowered in this. We may test vaccines in a way that we would think of as ethically unthinkable in normal times. We may go with somewhat lower safety standards for vaccines, because we’re facing a situation where life is dangerous. But yeah, the fastest human vaccine ever made was mumps. Four years, from start to finish.So I just want to be clear. Is there a world, according to the experts you’re talking to, who say the world of tiptoeing out and coming back and realizing that there’s a resurgence, and then tiptoeing back out again, that that could last years?Yes.And during that, the virus lasts? It doesn’t die off in the hot summers?There is zero evidence that this virus dies off in hot weather. The virus is circulating now in India, in Brazil, in Australia.Very, very hot environments.Exactly. There’s no evidence that it’s going to die out in the summer.Donald, I’m willing to speak for many listeners when I say that the idea of living in masks, with everyone sitting six feet apart, and the expectation that a viral resurgence might mean that even that becomes too risky and so everyone goes back under lockdown — that that could go on for years is really pretty depressing and kind of hard to wrap one’s head around.I know. But if we don’t go into a dance, means there’s going to be more infections and more deaths.We’ll be right back.Don, during this period, it feels like not everyone is going to be on equal footing, in the sense that some of us will have been infected and will possess some kind of immunity to Covid-19, right? And many of us, of course, will not have been infected and will not possess that immunity. So how does that factor into this, give and take, this dance you’re describing?Well, we’re already seeing this happen. There are a very small number of people now who are immune. And they’re very much in demand. They’re in demand for their blood, because you can harvest antibodies from their blood. They’re in demand for doing medical jobs that are dangerous, like intubating patients, because they can do it without fear of infection. They’ll be in demand for all sorts of other jobs, because they can travel anywhere. They can do face-to-face interactions with customers without any fear. And they’re going to be a special class in society. There’ll be different standards, different ways of living for two different classes in society. So say you’re an immune and I’m not. I basically have to stay inside here in hiding, and I’m depressed as hell about it. I have a granddaughter who’s going to be born in June, and I sit here in my apartment thinking, I may not see her until she’s two years old. And that’s horrible to contemplate, but it may be a fact. Meanwhile, you, as an immune, could go visit my granddaughter or go out and take my job, or —No one can take your job, Donald, just to be clear.Not a heck of a lot of people want my job. There’ll be different standards, different ways of living for two different classes in society for a while. It’s quite science fiction-y. It’s kind of dystopian.Right. That kind of a societal schism, right, between the immune and the still susceptible, it would seem to require a few pieces of firm knowledge. One is that there’s a widespread ability to tell who is immune versus who is not, and the other piece of knowledge is that we know for sure that being infected confers immunity. So how do you resolve either of those?We don’t know those things yet. We don’t know them for dead sure, but as Tony Fauci says, usually when you recover from disease, you’re immune for a while. But we don’t know how long the immunity lasts, because this disease has only been around since November at the earliest.Mm-hmm. Are there plans? Do you envision a universe in which people literally wear some sort of sign that they are immune and that that can be rigorously proven?Yes. That is already beginning to take place. Germany is talking about issuing certificates, but you don’t want something you can pass from person to person. So China takes people’s cell phones and has a QR code that you read as you come into the subway, you come into a restaurant, you come into any place where somebody can check your phone. And that readout tells the person looking at your phone that you’re immune. So yeah, people are already thinking about this.In the scenario that you’re laying out, immunity and the ability to show immunity would seem to be incredibly desirable and might create some very complicated incentives.Yes. People are going to be tempted to become immunes and to do it the chickenpox party way.What do you mean?To deliberately infect themselves, hoping for the best, but that they emerge at the end of it as an immune. That temptation is going to be enormous.You’re describing deliberate and perhaps large scale acts of self-infection.Yes. I am. There is a lot of historical precedent for that stuff. In the years before smallpox vaccine, people used to take pus from the blisters of smallpox victims, or dried up scabs from smallpox victims, and put the pus into — stab a little hole in their child’s arm and put some of the pus in there, or blow the scabs into your nose. And that would give you a usually mild case of smallpox. And I talked to an immunologist who said, look, the child had about a 1 percent chance of dying, and the parents recognized that. And that was better, because if you had a smallpox epidemic come through, usually, about a third of the susceptibles died. So if you had six kids, you might think hard about giving them all a little bit of smallpox in their arm.Don, what you’re describing is a very calculated risk that some people may take to self-infect, and I wonder just how dangerous it may be if people miscalculate.With the virus acting the way it is acting now, it’s very dangerous. We know that there are people who are more at risk, but we also know that it’s unpredictable — that young, athletic, healthy people, totally unpredictably, end up on a ventilator, and a few of them die.Right.So it’s people making life or death decisions for freedom.And a paycheck.And a paycheck, yes.Everything that you’re talking about here seems to assume the absence of a successful treatment and a world where we’re pretty much waiting for a vaccine. Could that change? When we’ve asked you this question in the past, you have said that there wasn’t a viable treatment. Do you have any sense that that may be changing and that a treatment might come before a vaccine?I don’t have any sense that it’s changing in an important way. There is something that doctors place some hope in, and that is taking the blood from people who’ve recovered from the disease, and removing the red blood cells and the white blood cells and everything else and leaving just the antibodies. Those antibodies glob onto the virus and neutralize it, and so you can inject them into somebody who’s sick. But it’s a technology that is not fast-moving, so it’s not in the immediate future. But scientists are hopeful that it’s in the mid-term future.So in other words, for the time being, we are left pretty much with the hammer and the dance as our most practical solution.Exactly.So Donald, with everything that you just said in mind, I want to return to that first time we ever spoke. Because when we had that conversation, you were well ahead of anybody else in preparing us for what the pandemic would mean on a personal level. You told us about your stockpile of food, your month worth of medicine, and you told us that we should be prepared not to see our friends and our family for a while. And all of that proved prescient. But there’s one area where I recall you, perhaps, underestimated something. You said be prepared for a couple of months of something that might look like a lockdown. And now, it’s feeling like it’s going to last a lot longer. So with that in mind, what preparations are you making now that the rest of us may end up making for ourselves in the coming days, weeks, months, to prepare for that new reality?I’m busy. I’m working harder than I’ve ever worked hard before, and that’s given me a sense of purpose. That gives me some psychological stability that a lot of other people don’t have the luck to have. I’m thinking about what am I going to do to entertain myself? I’m thinking of buying a fishing rod and becoming one of those old guys on the piers who’s fishing for bluefish. I like trout fishing, but it seems unlikely I’m going to get away to do that for a while. So it’s just, you have to mentally prepare yourself for these things. And now be it said, I have visions for the future that are rosy, and that keeps me going too.You do?Yeah. If you look at the periods after World War I and after World War II, not only did the economy come back after both those periods. Remember, after the one-two punch of World War I plus the Spanish influenza, we had the roaring ‘20s. After World War II, we had a period in which, in Europe, the war widows and pensions fund became the European welfare state. War profiteers suddenly faced higher taxes and a lot of scrutiny. People had pretty much had it with the rich by that time, and they wanted more. They wanted the G.I. Bill. They wanted federally-sponsored mortgages for housing. They wanted better health care. And to some extent, they got it. I was born in 1954, and my parents were of the generation that had made it through the Great Depression and through the Second World War. And they had a different attitude on life. They had a sense of, hey, we did this incredible thing. We did it all together. We got through it. I hope that sort of era comes again, that people will take more pleasure in small things in life. And that we will do more to make sure that we take care of each other, and that that’ll go through all levels of society. And like I said, I try not to predict the future, but maybe something like that will emerge from this.Well, of all the visions that you have given us, I like that one the best.Me too.Donald, thank you very much.Thank you.On Friday, Vice President Mike Pence declared that states have sufficient amount of testing to begin the process of reopening their economies, a claim that governors in multiple states immediately rejected as untrue. It’s not accurate to say there’s plenty of testing out there, and the governor should just get it done. That’s just not being straightforward. In interviews on CNN on Sunday, the governor of Maryland, Larry Hogan, and the governor of Virginia, Ralph Northam, said they would need significantly higher levels of testing before they would consider lifting their lockdowns.That’s just delusional to be making statements like that. For the national level to say that we have what we need and really to have no guidance to the state levels is just irresponsible, because we’re not there yet.We’ll be right back.Here’s what else you need to today.[CHANTING]Demonstrators took to the streets in several states across the country over the weekend to protest stay-at-home orders that they said were destroying the economy.I hope Whitmer understands that she’s not just going to be able to rule Michigan like other politicians rule China or something like that. We’re going to take our liberties, and we’re going to keep them, and we’re going to fight for them.The protests, which drew hundreds of people in Michigan, Texas and North Carolina, among other states, were largely organized by anti-government activists and libertarian groups, and were encouraged by President Trump, who took to Twitter to urge residents to liberate their states. But polling shows that most Americans support the lockdowns. A recent survey by Pew Research found that 66 percent of respondents feared that states would lift restrictions too quickly.That’s it for “The Daily.” I’m Michael Barbaro. See you tomorrow.Covid-19, the illness caused by the coronavirus, is arguably the leading cause of death in the United States right now. The virus has killed more than 1,800 Americans almost every day since April 7, and the official toll may be an undercount.By comparison, heart disease typically kills 1,774 Americans a day, and cancer kills 1,641.Yes, the coronavirus curves are plateauing. There are fewer hospital admissions in New York, the center of the epidemic, and fewer Covid-19 patients in I.C.U.s. The daily death toll is still grim, but no longer rising.An epidemiological model produced by the White House originally predicted 100,000 to 240,000 deaths by midsummer. Another model, by the University of Washington’s Institute for Health Metrics and Evaluation, now puts that figure at 60,000.While this is encouraging news, it masks some significant concerns. The institute’s projection runs through Aug. 4, describing only the first wave of this epidemic. Without a vaccine, the virus is expected to circulate for years, and the death tally will rise over time.The gains to date were achieved only by shutting down the country, a situation that cannot continue indefinitely. The White House’s “phased” plan for reopening will surely raise the death toll no matter how carefully it is executed. The best hope is that fatalities can be held to a minimum.Reputable longer-term projections for how many Americans will die vary, but they are all grim. Various experts consulted by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention in March predicted that the virus eventually could reach 48 percent to 65 percent of all Americans, with a fatality rate just under 1 percent, and would kill up to 1.7 million of them if nothing were done to stop the spread.A model by researchers at Imperial College London cited by the president on March 30 predicted 2.2 million deaths in the United States by September under the same circumstances.By comparison, about 420,000 Americans died in World War II.The limited data from China are even more discouraging. Its epidemic has been halted — for the moment — and virtually everyone infected in its first wave has died or recovered.China has officially reported about 83,000 cases and 4,632 deaths, which is a fatality rate of over 5 percent. The Trump administration has questioned the figures but has not produced more accurate ones.Fatality rates depend heavily on how overwhelmed hospitals get and what percentage of cases are tested. China’s estimated death rate was 17 percent in the first week of January, when Wuhan was in chaos, according to a Center for Evidence-Based Medicine report, but only 0.7 percent by late February.In this country, hospitals in several cities, including New York, came to the brink of chaos. Officials in both Wuhan and New York had to revise their death counts upward this week when they realized that many people had died at home of Covid-19, strokes, heart attacks or other causes, or because ambulances never came for them.In fast-moving epidemics, far more victims pour into hospitals or die at home than doctors can test; at the same time, the mildly ill or asymptomatic never get tested. Those two factors distort the true fatality rate in opposite ways. If you don’t know how many people are infected, you don’t know how deadly a virus is.Only when tens of thousands of antibody tests are done will we know how many silent carriers there may be in the United States. The C.D.C. has suggested it might be 25 percent of those who test positive. Researchers in Iceland said it might be double that.China is also revising its own estimates. In February, a major study concluded that only 1 percent of cases in Wuhan were asymptomatic. New research says perhaps 60 percent were. Our knowledge gaps are still wide enough to make epidemiologists weep.“All models are just models,” Dr. Anthony S. Fauci, science adviser to the White House coronavirus task force, has said. “When you get new data, you change them.”There may be good news buried in this inconsistency: The virus may also be mutating to cause fewer symptoms. In the movies, viruses become more deadly. In reality, they usually become less so, because asymptomatic strains reach more hosts. Even the 1918 Spanish flu virus eventually faded into the seasonal H1N1 flu.At the moment, however, we do not know exactly how transmissible or lethal the virus is. But refrigerated trucks parked outside hospitals tell us all we need to know: It is far worse than a bad flu season.No one knows exactly what percentage of Americans have been infected so far — estimates have ranged from 3 percent to 10 percent — but it is likely a safe bet that at least 300 million of us are still vulnerable.Until a vaccine or another protective measure emerges, there is no scenario, epidemiologists agreed, in which it is safe for that many people to suddenly come out of hiding. If Americans pour back out in force, all will appear quiet for perhaps three weeks.Then the emergency rooms will get busy again.“There’s this magical thinking saying, ‘We’re all going to hunker down for a while and then the vaccine we need will be available,’” said Dr. Peter J. Hotez, dean of the National School of Tropical Medicine at Baylor College of Medicine.In his wildly popular March 19 article in Medium, “Coronavirus: The Hammer and the Dance,” Tomas Pueyo correctly predicted the national lockdown, which he called the hammer, and said it would lead to a new phase, which he called the dance, in which essential parts of the economy could reopen, including some schools and some factories with skeleton crews.Every epidemiological model envisions something like the dance. Each assumes the virus will blossom every time too many hosts emerge and force another lockdown. Then the cycle repeats. On the models, the curves of rising and falling deaths resemble a row of shark teeth.Surges are inevitable, the models predict, even when stadiums, churches, theaters, bars and restaurants remain closed, all travelers from abroad are quarantined for 14 days, and domestic travel is tightly restricted to prevent high-intensity areas from reinfecting low-intensity ones.The tighter the restrictions, experts say, the fewer the deaths and the longer the periods between lockdowns. Most models assume states will eventually do widespread temperature checks, rapid testing and contact tracing, as is routine in Asia.Even the “Opening Up America Again” guidelines Mr. Trump issued on Thursday have three levels of social distancing, and recommend that vulnerable Americans stay hidden. The plan endorses testing, isolation and contact tracing — but does not specify how these measures will be paid for, or how long it will take to put them in place.On Friday, none of that stopped the president from contradicting his own message by sending out tweets encouraging protesters in Michigan, Minnesota and Virginia to fight their states’ shutdowns.China did not allow Wuhan, Nanjing or other cities to reopen until intensive surveillance found zero new cases for 14 straight days, the virus’s incubation period. Compared with China or Italy, the United States is still a playground.Americans can take domestic flights, drive where they want, and roam streets and parks. Despite restrictions, everyone seems to know someone discreetly arranging play dates for children, holding backyard barbecues or meeting people on dating apps.Partly as a result, the country has seen up to 30,000 new case infections each day. “People need to realize that it's not safe to play poker wearing bandannas,” Dr. Schaffner said.Even with rigorous measures, Asian countries have had trouble keeping the virus under control.China, which has reported about 100 new infections per day, recently closed all the country’s movie theaters again. Singapore has closed all schools and nonessential workplaces. Japan recently declared a state of emergency. (South Korea has struggled at times, too, but on Sunday reported only eight new cases, the first single-digit increase in two months.)Resolve to Save Lives, a public health advocacy group run by Dr. Thomas R. Frieden, the former director of the C.D.C., has published detailed and strict criteria for when the economy can reopen and when it must be closed.Reopening requires declining cases for 14 days, the tracing of 90 percent of contacts, an end to health care worker infections, recuperation places for mild cases and many other hard-to-reach goals.“We need to reopen the faucet gradually, not allow the floodgates to reopen,” Dr. Frieden said. “This is a time to work to make that day come sooner.”Imagine an America divided into two classes: those who have recovered from infection with the coronavirus and presumably have some immunity to it; and those who are still vulnerable.“It will be a frightening schism,” Dr. David Nabarro, a World Health Organization special envoy on Covid-19, predicted. “Those with antibodies will be able to travel and work, and the rest will be discriminated against.”Already, people with presumed immunity are very much in demand, asked to donate their blood for antibodies and doing risky medical jobs fearlessly.Soon the government will have to invent a way to certify who is truly immune. A test for IgG antibodies, which are produced once immunity is established, would make sense, said Dr. Daniel R. Lucey, an expert on pandemics at Georgetown University’s law school. Many companies are working on them.Dr. Fauci has said the White House was discussing certificates like those proposed in Germany. China uses cellphone QR codes linked to the owner’s personal details so others cannot borrow them.The California adult-film industry pioneered a similar idea a decade ago. Actors use a cellphone app to prove they have tested H.I.V. negative in the last 14 days, and producers can verify the information on a password-protected website.As Americans stuck in lockdown see their immune neighbors resuming their lives and perhaps even taking the jobs they lost, it is not hard to imagine the enormous temptation to join them through self-infection, experts predicted. Younger citizens in particular will calculate that risking a serious illness may still be better than impoverishment and isolation.“My daughter, who is a Harvard economist, keeps telling me her age group needs to have Covid-19 parties to develop immunity and keep the economy going,” said Dr. Michele Barry, who directs the Center for Innovation in Global Health at Stanford University. The comment, she explained later, was meant in jest. Still, it has happened before. In the 1980s, Cuba successfully contained its small AIDS epidemic by brutally forcing everyone who tested positive into isolation camps. Inside, however, the residents had their own bungalows, food, medical care, salaries, theater troupes and art classes.Dozens of Cuba’s homeless youths infected themselves through sex or blood injections to get in, said Dr. Jorge Pérez Ávila, an AIDS specialist who is Cuba’s version of Dr. Fauci. Many died before antiretroviral therapy was introduced.It would be a gamble for American youth, too. The obese and immunocompromised are clearly at risk, but even slim, healthy young Americans have died of Covid-19.The next two years will proceed in fits and starts, experts said. As more immune people get back to work, more of the economy will recover.But if too many people get infected at once, new lockdowns will become inevitable. To avoid that, widespread testing will be imperative.Dr. Fauci has said “the virus will tell us” when it’s safe. He means that once a national baseline of hundreds of thousands of daily tests is established across the nation, any viral spread can be spotted when the percentage of positive results rises.Detecting rising fevers as they are mapped by Kinsa’s smart thermometers may give an earlier signal, Dr. Schaffner said.But diagnostic testing has been troubled from the beginning. Despite assurances from the White House, doctors and patients continue to complain of delays and shortages.To keep the virus in check, several experts insisted, the country also must start isolating all the ill — including mild cases.In this country, patients who test positive are asked to stay in their homes but keep away from their families.Television news has been filled with recuperating personalities like CNN’s Chris Cuomo, sweating alone in his basement while his wife left food atop the stairs, his children waved and the dogs hung back.But even Mr. Cuomo ended up illustrating why the W.H.O. strongly opposes home isolation. On Wednesday, he revealed that his wife had the virus.“If I was forced to select only one intervention, it would be the rapid isolation of all cases,” said Dr. Bruce Aylward, who led the W.H.O. observer team to China.In China, anyone testing positive, no matter how mild their symptoms, was required to immediately enter an infirmary-style hospital — often set up in a gymnasium or community center outfitted with oxygen tanks and CT scanners.There, they recuperated under the eyes of nurses. That reduced the risk to families, and being with other victims relieved some patients’ fears. Nurses even led dance and exercise classes to raise spirits, and help victims clear their lungs and keep their muscle tone.Still, experts were divided on the idea of such wards. Dr. Fineberg co-wrote a New York Times Op-Ed article calling for mandatory but “humane quarantine processes.”By contrast, Marc Lipsitch, an epidemiologist at the Harvard T.H. Chan School of Public Health, opposed the idea, saying: “I don’t trust our government to remove people from their families by force.”Ultimately, suppressing a virus requires testing all the contacts of every known case. But the United States is far short of that goal.Someone working in a restaurant or factory may have dozens or even hundreds of contacts. In China’s Sichuan Province, for example, each known case had an average of 45 contacts.The C.D.C. has about 600 contact tracers and, until recently, state and local health departments employed about 1,600, mostly for tracing syphilis and tuberculosis cases.China hired and trained 9,000 in Wuhan alone. Dr. Frieden recently estimated that the United States will need at least 300,000.Even though limited human trials of three candidates — two here and one in China — have already begun, Dr. Fauci has repeatedly said that any effort to make a vaccine will take at least a year to 18 months.All the experts familiar with vaccine production agreed that even that timeline was optimistic. Dr. Paul Offit, a vaccinologist at the Children’s Hospital of Philadelphia, noted that the record is four years, for the mumps vaccine.Researchers differed sharply over what should be done to speed the process. Modern biotechnology techniques using RNA or DNA platforms make it possible to develop candidate vaccines faster than ever before.But clinical trials take time, in part because there is no way to rush the production of antibodies in the human body.Also, for unclear reasons, some previous vaccine candidates against coronaviruses like SARS have triggered “antibody-dependent enhancement,” which makes recipients more susceptible to infection, rather than less. In the past, vaccines against H.I.V. and dengue have unexpectedly done the same.A new vaccine is usually first tested in fewer than 100 young, healthy volunteers. If it appears safe and produces antibodies, thousands more volunteers — in this case, probably front-line workers at the highest risk — will get either it or a placebo in what is called a Phase 3 trial.It is possible to speed up that process with “challenge trials.” Scientists vaccinate small numbers of volunteers, wait until they develop antibodies, and then “challenge” them with a deliberate infection to see if the vaccine protects them.Challenge trials are used only when a disease is completely curable, such as malaria or typhoid fever. Normally, it is ethically unthinkable to challenge subjects with a disease with no cure, such as Covid-19.Updated May 28, 2020States are reopening bit by bit. This means that more public spaces are available for use and more and more businesses are being allowed to open again. The federal government is largely leaving the decision up to states, and some state leaders are leaving the decision up to local authorities. Even if you aren’t being told to stay at home, it’s still a good idea to limit trips outside and your interaction with other people.Touching contaminated objects and then infecting ourselves with the germs is not typically how the virus spreads. But it can happen. A number of studies of flu, rhinovirus, coronavirus and other microbes have shown that respiratory illnesses, including the new coronavirus, can spread by touching contaminated surfaces, particularly in places like day care centers, offices and hospitals. But a long chain of events has to happen for the disease to spread that way. The best way to protect yourself from coronavirus — whether it’s surface transmission or close human contact — is still social distancing, washing your hands, not touching your face and wearing masks.Common symptoms include fever, a dry cough, fatigue and difficulty breathing or shortness of breath. Some of these symptoms overlap with those of the flu, making detection difficult, but runny noses and stuffy sinuses are less common. The C.D.C. has also added chills, muscle pain, sore throat, headache and a new loss of the sense of taste or smell as symptoms to look out for. Most people fall ill five to seven days after exposure, but symptoms may appear in as few as two days or as many as 14 days.If air travel is unavoidable, there are some steps you can take to protect yourself. Most important: Wash your hands often, and stop touching your face. If possible, choose a window seat. A study from Emory University found that during flu season, the safest place to sit on a plane is by a window, as people sitting in window seats had less contact with potentially sick people. Disinfect hard surfaces. When you get to your seat and your hands are clean, use disinfecting wipes to clean the hard surfaces at your seat like the head and arm rest, the seatbelt buckle, the remote, screen, seat back pocket and the tray table. If the seat is hard and nonporous or leather or pleather, you can wipe that down, too. (Using wipes on upholstered seats could lead to a wet seat and spreading of germs rather than killing them.)More than 40 million people — the equivalent of 1 in 4 U.S. workers — have filed for unemployment benefits since the pandemic took hold. One in five who were working in February reported losing a job or being furloughed in March or the beginning of April, data from a Federal Reserve survey released on May 14 showed, and that pain was highly concentrated among low earners. Fully 39 percent of former workers living in a household earning $40,000 or less lost work, compared with 13 percent in those making more than $100,000, a Fed official said.There is an uptick in people reporting symptoms of chilblains, which are painful red or purple lesions that typically appear in the winter on fingers or toes. The lesions are emerging as yet another symptom of infection with the new coronavirus. Chilblains are caused by inflammation in small blood vessels in reaction to cold or damp conditions, but they are usually common in the coldest winter months. Federal health officials do not include toe lesions in the list of coronavirus symptoms, but some dermatologists are pushing for a change, saying so-called Covid toe should be sufficient grounds for testing.Yes, but make sure you keep six feet of distance between you and people who don’t live in your home. Even if you just hang out in a park, rather than go for a jog or a walk, getting some fresh air, and hopefully sunshine, is a good idea.Taking one’s temperature to look for signs of fever is not as easy as it sounds, as “normal” temperature numbers can vary, but generally, keep an eye out for a temperature of 100.5 degrees Fahrenheit or higher. If you don’t have a thermometer (they can be pricey these days), there are other ways to figure out if you have a fever, or are at risk of Covid-19 complications.The C.D.C. has recommended that all Americans wear cloth masks if they go out in public. This is a shift in federal guidance reflecting new concerns that the coronavirus is being spread by infected people who have no symptoms. Until now, the C.D.C., like the W.H.O., has advised that ordinary people don’t need to wear masks unless they are sick and coughing. Part of the reason was to preserve medical-grade masks for health care workers who desperately need them at a time when they are in continuously short supply. Masks don’t replace hand washing and social distancing.If you’ve been exposed to the coronavirus or think you have, and have a fever or symptoms like a cough or difficulty breathing, call a doctor. They should give you advice on whether you should be tested, how to get tested, and how to seek medical treatment without potentially infecting or exposing others.If you’re sick and you think you’ve been exposed to the new coronavirus, the C.D.C. recommends that you call your healthcare provider and explain your symptoms and fears. They will decide if you need to be tested. Keep in mind that there’s a chance — because of a lack of testing kits or because you’re asymptomatic, for instance — you won’t be able to get tested.Charity Navigator, which evaluates charities using a numbers-based system, has a running list of nonprofits working in communities affected by the outbreak. You can give blood through the American Red Cross, and World Central Kitchen has stepped in to distribute meals in major cities.But in these abnormal times, several experts argued that putting a few Americans at high risk for fast results could be more ethical than leaving millions at risk for years.“Fewer get harmed if you do a challenge trial in a few people than if you do a Phase 3 trial in thousands,” said Dr. Lipsitch, who recently published a paper advocating challenge trials in the Journal of Infectious Diseases. Almost immediately, he said, he heard from volunteers.Others were deeply uncomfortable with that idea. “I think it’s very unethical — but I can see how we might do it,” said Dr. Lucey.The hidden danger of challenge trials, vaccinologists explained, is that they recruit too few volunteers to show whether a vaccine creates enhancement, since it may be a rare but dangerous problem.“Challenge trials won’t give you an answer on safety,” said Michael T. Osterholm, director of the University of Minnesota’s Center for Infectious Disease Research and Policy. “It may be a big problem.”Dr. W. Ian Lipkin, a virologist at Columbia University’s Mailman School of Public Health, suggested an alternative strategy. Pick at least two vaccine candidates, briefly test them in humans and do challenge trials in monkeys. Start making the winner immediately, even while widening the human testing to look for hidden problems.As arduous as testing a vaccine is, producing hundreds of millions of doses is even tougher, experts said.Most American vaccine plants produce only about 5 million to 10 million doses a year, needed largely by the 4 million babies born and 4 million people who reach age 65 annually, said Dr. R. Gordon Douglas Jr., a former president of Merck’s vaccine division.But if a vaccine is invented, the United States could need 300 million doses — or 600 million if two shots are required. And just as many syringes.“People have to start thinking big,” Dr. Douglas said. “With that volume, you’ve got to start cranking it out pretty soon.”Flu vaccine plants are large, but those that grow the vaccines in chicken eggs are not suitable for modern vaccines, which grow in cell broths, he said.European countries have plants but will need them for their own citizens. China has a large vaccine industry, and may be able to expand it over the coming months. It might be able to make vaccines for the United States, experts said. But captive customers must pay whatever price the seller asks, and the safety and efficacy standards of some Chinese companies are imperfect.India and Brazil also have large vaccine industries. If the virus moves rapidly through their crowded populations, they may lose millions of citizens but achieve widespread herd immunity well before the United States does. In that case, they might have spare vaccine plant capacity.Alternatively, suggested Arthur M. Silverstein, a retired medical historian at the Johns Hopkins School of Medicine, the government might take over and sterilize existing liquor or beer plants, which have large fermentation vats.“Any distillery could be converted,” he said.In the short term, experts were more optimistic about treatments than vaccines. Several felt that so-called convalescent serum could work.The basic technique has been used for over a century: Blood is drawn from people who have recovered from a disease, then filtered to remove everything but the antibodies. The antibody-rich immunoglobulin is injected into patients.The obstacle is that there are now relatively few survivors to harvest blood from.In the pre-vaccine era, antibodies were “farmed” in horses and sheep. But that process was hard to keep sterile, and animal proteins sometimes triggered allergic reactions.The modern alternative is monoclonal antibodies. These treatment regimens, which recently came very close to conquering the Ebola epidemic in eastern Congo, are the most likely short-term game changer, experts said.The most effective antibodies are chosen, and the genes that produce them are spliced into a benign virus that will grow in a cellular broth.But, as with vaccines, growing and purifying monoclonal antibodies takes time. In theory, with enough production, they could be used not just to save lives but to protect front-line workers.Antibodies can last for weeks before breaking down — how long depends on many factors, Dr. Silverstein noted — and they cannot kill virus that is already hidden inside cells.Having a daily preventive pill would be an even better solution, because pills can be synthesized in factories far faster than vaccines or antibodies can be grown and purified.But even if one were invented, production would have to ramp up until it was as ubiquitous as aspirin, so 300 million Americans could take it daily.Mr. Trump has mentioned hydroxychloroquine and azithromycin so often that his news conferences sound like infomercials. But all the experts agreed with Dr. Fauci that no decision should be made until clinical trials are completed.Some recalled that in the 1950s inadequate testing of thalidomide caused thousands of children to be born with malformed limbs. More than one hydroxychloroquine study has been halted after patients who got high doses developed abnormal heart rhythms.“I doubt anyone will tolerate high doses, and there are vision issues if it accumulates,” Dr. Barry said. Others were just as harsh, especially about Mr. Trump’s idea of combining a chloroquine with azithromycin.“It’s total nonsense,” said Dr. Luciana Borio, a former director of medical and biodefense preparedness at the National Security Council. “I told my family, if I get Covid, do not give me this combo.”Chloroquine might protect patients hospitalized with pneumonia against lethal cytokine storms because it damps down immune reactions, several doctors said.That does not, however, make it useful for preventing infections, as Mr. Trump has implied it would be, because it has no known antiviral properties.Several antivirals, including remdesivir, favipiravir and baloxavir, are being tested against the coronavirus; the latter two are flu drugs.Trials of various combinations in China are set to issue results by next month, but they will be small and possibly inconclusive because doctors there ran out of patients to test. End dates for most trials in the United States are not yet set.Previously unthinkable societal changes have taken place already. Schools and business have closed in every state, and tens of millions have applied for unemployment. Taxes and mortgage payments are delayed, and foreclosures forbidden.Stimulus checks, intended to offset the crisis, began landing in checking accounts this week, making much of America, temporarily, a welfare state. Food banks are opening across the country, and huge lines have formed.A public health crisis of this magnitude requires international cooperation on a scale not seen in decades. Yet Mr. Trump is moving to defund the W.H.O., the only organization capable of coordinating such a response.And he spent most of this year antagonizing China, which now has the world’s most powerful functioning economy and may become the dominant supplier of drugs and vaccines. China has used the pandemic to extend its global influence, and says it has sent medical gear and equipment to nearly 120 countries.A major recipient is the United States, through Project Airbridge, an air-cargo operation overseen by Mr. Trump’s son-in-law, Jared Kushner.This is not a world in which “America First” is a viable strategy, several experts noted.“If President Trump cares about stepping up the public health efforts here, he should look for avenues to collaborate with China and stop the insults,” said Nicholas Mulder, an economic historian at Cornell University. He has called Mr. Kushner’s project “Lend-Lease in reverse,” a reference to American military aid to other countries during World War II.Dr. Osterholm was even blunter. “If we alienate the Chinese with our rhetoric, I think it will come back to bite us,” he said.“What if they come up with the first vaccine? They have a choice about who they sell it to. Are we top of the list? Why would we be?”Once the pandemic has passed, the national recovery may be swift. The economy rebounded after both world wars, Dr. Mulder noted.The psychological fallout will be harder to gauge. The isolation and poverty caused by a long shutdown may drive up rates of domestic abuse, depression and suicide.Even political perspectives may shift. Initially, the virus heavily hit Democratic cities like Seattle, New York and Detroit. But as it spreads through the country, it will spare no one.Even voters in Republican-leaning states who do not blame Mr. Trump for America’s lack of preparedness or for limiting access to health insurance may change their minds if they see friends and relatives die.In one of the most provocative analyses in his follow-up article, “Coronavirus: Out of Many, One,” Mr. Pueyo analyzed Medicare and census data on age and obesity in states that recently resisted shutdowns and counties that voted Republican in 2016.He calculated that those voters could be 30 percent more likely to die of the virus.In the periods after both wars, Dr. Mulder noted, society and incomes became more equal. Funds created for veterans’ and widows’ pensions led to social safety nets, measures like the G.I. Bill and V.A. home loans were adopted, unions grew stronger, and tax benefits for the wealthy withered.If a vaccine saves lives, many Americans may become less suspicious of conventional medicine and more accepting of science in general — including climate change, experts said.The blue skies that have shone above American cities during this lockdown era could even become permanent.Advertisement