https://www.nytimes.com/2007/04/25/education/25education.html
Congressman, Teacher, Soldier, and He’s Back in Town for a Visit - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
133
AdvertisementSupported byOn EducationBy Samuel G. FreedmanMANKATO, Minn. Tim Walz strode eagerly across the tile floor and past the metal lockers, heading toward center hall of Mankato West High School. At the reception desk he borrowed a walkie-talkie and put a call out for Wayne Johnson, the janitor. Half a minute later, the custodian bounded down the stairs, broom and dustpan in hand, and the reunions began.Every time Mr. Walz moved a few steps, he bumped into a familiar face and a memory. He asked one girl from the track team about her best time this season in the 800 meters. A boy, just admitted to Northwestern, thanked Mr. Walz for the recommendation letter. A couple of teachers recalled when, stuck in the basement during a tornado, they sang those endless rounds of “Row, Row, Row Your Boat.”After his first 100 days as a Congressional representative, Mr. Walz was home. He was back in his district, a vast swath of southern Minnesota, but more important, on this April morning he was back at his old high school. Here he had taught geography, coached football, advised seniors and supervised the lunchroom. His return to Mankato West, though, was more than nostalgic. Of the 535 members of Congress, Mr. Walz, 43, is the only active schoolteacher, still a tenured faculty member here. As the federal government has grown deeply enmeshed in public education, exemplified by the No Child Left Behind law now up for reauthorization, only Mr. Walz among his colleagues has experienced its effects in his own classroom.Until he went on leave last April to run for Congress, he was teaching 167 students in five classes a day and meeting individually each week with 40 special-ed pupils. His wife, Gwen, was and remains the administrator in charge of Mankato’s compliance with No Child Left Behind.MR. WALZ’S former domain, Room 112, contains a geography teacher’s adornments: a Yucatan hammock, an AIDS-prevention poster from Kenya, a full-size replica of a terra cotta soldier from Xian, China. The objects measure the distance he has traveled from his hometown of West Point, Neb., where he graduated from high school in a class of 25 that included 12 cousins. “Finding someone to date,” he recalled, “was kind of a problem.”He first grasped the grand scale of the globe as a teenager reading “Heart of Darkness” and “The Razor’s Edge.” At 25, having never left the United States, he won a fellowship to teach in China. Since then, he has traveled abroad 40 times, not counting his annual training deployments to Norway as an officer in the Army National Guard.For many years, Mr. Walz’s goal had been to bring the whole world into his classroom. In the small town of Alliance, Neb., in the early 1990s, he offered a year of global geography as well as an advanced-placement course. One of his classes, studying genocide, came up with a list of traits that made a nation likely to descend into civil strife.In 1996, he and his wife moved to Minnesota to be closer to her family, and he brought his curriculum here. He loved making geography a way to teach critical thinking. He would have students look at robbery statistics for St. Paul neighborhoods, then correlate the numbers with figures for per-capita income and the frequency of police patrols. He lived for that “Aha!” moment when someone realized that robbers did not target the affluent but rather the unprotected, who were often the poor.When Mr. Walz speaks about No Child Left Behind, he balances his praise for the ideal of accountability with criticism of its testing provisions as too rigid. Mankato West, for instance, is considered out of compliance solely because several dozen special-education pupils out of a student body of 1,200 did not make “adequate yearly progress” on math.But what inspires the congressman’s greater frustration is something subtler, that only a teacher would notice: How the emphasis on standardized tests has narrowed the intellectual range of teaching. He had to forgo the time-consuming studies of crime in St. Paul in favor of drilling students on state capitals. He had to reduce world history from a yearlong class to a four-week unit. Yet even here in the heartland, the outside world has become more rather than less evident. Mexican immigrants work in the meat-packing plants. Somali refugees have formed a mosque in Rochester. A Scottish corporation owns a nearby wind farm. And Mr. Walz, like the parents of several students, has served overseas in the military, and his old National Guard unit has been deployed in Iraq since March 2006.As he guest-taught two history classes here during his recent visit, Mr. Walz took questions that bespoke expansive curiosity. How do you deal with an aggressive Iran? What is America’s responsibility for helping Iraqi refugees? And why, as one girl asked, did the French family she stayed with as a exchange student know so much more about her country than she knew about theirs?Mr. Walz answered as a Democrat who had run on an antiwar platform, but also as a veteran with no taste for isolationism. And he pointed out with chagrin that in Washington little value was placed on the supple, complicated reasoning he had tried to engender in his students. On one political talk show, he said, a producer had instructed him, “We don’t do nuance.”Soon the buzzer sounded. The visit was just about over. “I can tell you for a fact,” Mr. Walz told the lingering students, “there have been far better debates held in rooms like this than on the floor of Congress.”Advertisement