http://www.nytimes.com/2016/11/05/us/st-paul-minnesota-police-dog-bite.html
After Violent Encounter Between Police and a Black Man, Something Rare — An Apology - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
115
AdvertisementSupported bytranscriptN/ABy Mitch SmithOn the day in June that Todd Axtell became police chief in St. Paul, he happened to meet Frank Baker, a local resident who wished him well in his new job. Then, the next night, a police dog bit Mr. Baker on the leg and a police officer kicked him, leaving him hospitalized for two weeks with collapsed lungs and large lacerations.As with so many violent police encounters across the country, the incident was captured on grainy dash camera video, with officers yelling commands and Mr. Baker, an African-American man in his 50s, shrieking in pain. But when the footage was released on Friday, it came with something not often seen in such cases: An apology.“I’m disappointed and upset by what the video shows,” said Chief Axtell, who met with Mr. Baker this summer while he was hospitalized, and again on Friday to offer his “deepest apologies.”Chief Axtell said he had suspended the canine handler, Officer Brian Ficcadenti, for 30 days, rejecting the 10-day suspension recommended by the local review board. The police department declined to comment on any discipline for the officer who kicked Mr. Baker, citing the ongoing personnel matter.Officer Ficcadenti said in his report that Mr. Baker, who was sitting in his car talking on a cellphone, matched the description officers had received of a person with a gun — a black male with dreadlocks in a white T-shirt. The officer wrote that Mr. Baker got out of the car as requested, but then stopped cooperating. The police never found a gun.“The officers very much feared for their safety, very much believed this was a person with a gun,” said Chris Wachtler, a lawyer for the St. Paul Police Federation, which represents rank-and-file officers.“The union’s position at this point is that the force used was appropriate under the circumstances,” Mr. Wachtler said, “and if the person would have complied, no force would have been necessary whatsoever.”Chief Axtell disagreed, and said he had ordered additional training for officers in light of the incident. In his discipline letter to Officer Ficcadenti, he said the tactics were “reckless at best” and amounted to “conduct unbecoming a police officer,” among several other violations.“The content of this video does not reflect the way we strive to do our job day in and day out,” he said at a news conference. “This simply isn’t the St. Paul way.”The mayor of St. Paul, Chris Coleman, said in a statement that he was “deeply disturbed” by the video but confident “that appropriate discipline will be taken.”The footage of Mr. Baker being bitten by the police dog and kicked by an officer is the latest in a string of recent episodes in which Minnesota police officers have used force against African-Americans. Protesters gathered for weeks after Jamar Clark was killed by Minneapolis officers last November, and again this summer when an officer from suburban St. Anthony fatally shot Philando Castile during a traffic stop.Robert Bennett, a lawyer representing Mr. Baker, said Friday that his client was walking again and had largely recovered, but that he was having trouble with his scars and experiencing lingering pain. He said Mr. Baker was trying to cooperate with officers when the dog bit him.Mr. Baker did not immediately go public about the incident because he wanted to give Chief Axtell time to conduct a full investigation, Mr. Bennett said. He added that Chief Axtell and Mr. Baker had a productive meeting on Friday before the video was made public, and that both men deserved credit for how they responded.“They had a heartfelt conversation; there was an apology,” Mr. Bennett said. “It was frankly how human beings ought to treat each other.”Advertisement