https://www.nytimes.com/2020/05/29/us/politics/trump-looting-shooting.html
How Trump's Twitter Remarks Escalate Growing Crisis in Minneapolis - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
11
AdvertisementSupported byThe president’s tweets prompted Twitter to append them with a note saying the posts were “glorifying violence.” Joe Biden condemned Mr. Trump, saying “it’s no time to encourage violence.”By Maggie Haberman and Alexander BurnsPresident Trump issued a violent ultimatum to protesters in Minneapolis on Friday and inserted himself in a harshly divisive fashion into the crisis there, attacking the city’s Democratic mayor and raising the specter that the military could use armed force to suppress riots that erupted after the death of George Floyd, a black man, at the hands of a white police officer.Mr. Trump’s threat to have unruly protesters shot — “when the looting starts, the shooting starts” — stirred an outcry in Minnesota and from his national critics, with his Democratic challenger in the presidential race, Joseph R. Biden Jr., expressing indignation that Mr. Trump was “calling for violence against American citizens during a moment of pain.” The aftermath of Mr. Trump’s comments proceeded along lines familiar from other presidential eruptions, with Mr. Trump doing nothing to temper his heated tweets for many hours before suddenly retreating some 14 hours later. The president insisted on Twitter that he had been misinterpreted, then held an event in the Rose Garden at which he made no mention of events in Minneapolis, and finally at an afternoon round table described the strife there as tragic and conceded demonstrators had legitimate grievances.But Mr. Trump’s overnight rhetoric about the crisis was clear enough in its description of a potential crackdown, and framed in bluntly ideological terms as a broadside against a liberal local government.“I can’t stand back & watch this happen to a great American City, Minneapolis,” Mr. Trump wrote shortly before 1 a.m. on Friday. “A total lack of leadership. Either the very weak Radical Left Mayor, Jacob Frey, get his act together and bring the City under control, or I will send in the National Guard & get the job done right.”Mr. Trump’s mix of demands and attacks came despite the fact that Gov. Tim Walz of Minnesota had already activated and deployed the National Guard in response to a request from local leaders. Mr. Trump began talking about the disorder in Minneapolis overnight as cable news showed a police station engulfed in a fire set by protesters. The four city police officers involved in the death of Mr. Floyd were assigned to that station.Mr. Floyd was killed on Monday after one of the officers, who were responding to a call about what was said to be a counterfeit bill used at a store, knelt on his neck while he was handcuffed and lying facedown on the ground. Mr. Floyd called out, “I can’t breathe.” The officer, Derek Chauvin, and the three others were fired the next day. On Friday afternoon, Minnesota officials said that Mr. Chauvin had been arrested. Mr. Trump, in his initial tweets, denigrated the protesters and issued demands in a situation that was already spiraling out of control.“These THUGS are dishonoring the memory of George Floyd, and I won’t let that happen,” the president wrote in another post, which was flagged with a warning label by Twitter. “Just spoke to Governor Tim Walz and told him that the Military is with him all the way. Any difficulty and we will assume control but, when the looting starts, the shooting starts. Thank you!”In saying “when the looting starts, the shooting starts,” Mr. Trump echoed a phrase coined by a Miami police chief in the 1960s about crackdowns on black neighborhoods during times of unrest. Walter Headley, the Miami police chief in 1967, warned that young black men whom he called “hoodlums” had “taken advantage of the civil rights campaign,” and added, “We don’t mind being accused of police brutality.”Shortly before his midafternoon event in the Rose Garden — an announcement of punitive measures against China — Mr. Trump tweeted in a puzzling construction that his remarks overnight had been “a fact, not a statement,” and said he had not been urging further violence but rather describing it as a natural consequence of looting. “I don’t want this to happen, and that’s what the expression put out last night means,” Mr. Trump said of the earlier tweet. By late Friday afternoon, at a White House event focused on the coronavirus, Mr. Trump was noting that he had spoken to Mr. Floyd’s family — “they were grieving,” he said — and condemning the actions of Mr. Chauvin. “It certainly looked like there was no excuse for it,” he said, calling it a “terrible insult to police and to policemen.”Mr. Trump said he had not known the origins of the statement he used about “looting” and “shooting,” but that he had heard it for a long time and that he intended it to be about the protesters’ actions. “Certainly there were a lot of different people and there were good people too,” Mr. Trump acknowledged of the protesters when pressed by a questioner. “They were protesting for the right reason.” Others, he said, did “a great disservice” to the city. Twitter officials appended Mr. Trump’s “shooting starts” tweet with a note saying the remark was “glorifying violence.”That provoked another tweet from the president accusing Twitter of having targeted “Republicans, Conservatives & the President of the United States” and prompting his aides to repost his original tweets on the official White House Twitter account. It was also flagged by Twitter.On Friday afternoon, Mr. Biden condemned the president’s remarks, without naming Mr. Trump.“This is no time for incendiary tweets,” Mr. Biden said over a livestream from his basement. “It’s no time to encourage violence.”“The original sin of this country still stains our nation today and sometimes we manage to overlook it,” Mr. Biden said. “We just push forward with a thousand other tasks in our daily life, but it’s always there, and weeks like this, we see it plainly that we’re a country with an open wound. None of us can turn away.”In a television interview on Friday evening, Mr. Biden was more pointed, saying that over time, Mr. Trump has “stoked racism.” In a statement posted on Twitter, former President Barack Obama described hearing anguished reactions from African-Americans to the images of Mr. Floyd lying facedown with a knee on his neck. Mr. Obama said he shared their feelings. “For millions of Americans, being treated differently on account of race is tragically, painfully, maddeningly ‘normal,’” in even the most ordinary situations, he said. “This shouldn’t be ‘normal’ in 2020 America,” Mr. Obama said, calling for officials to investigate Mr. Floyd’s death and for all Americans to help end “the legacy of bigotry and unequal treatment.” When the video of Mr. Floyd lying on the ground under the police officer’s knee first circulated, Mr. Trump called it “shocking,” and at the White House on Thursday, the press secretary, Kayleigh McEnany, said the president was “very upset” seeing it.But the protests in Minneapolis have recalled some of the worst scenes of unrest this century in response to police brutality in the treatment of black men. When conflicts involving race have arisen during his presidency, Mr. Trump has often avoided taking a clear position. When neo-Nazis marched in Charlottesville, Va., in 2017 and a counterprotester was killed, Mr. Trump condemned the death but told reporters there were “very fine people” on “both sides” of the matter, prompting outrage. Mr. Biden referred to Mr. Trump’s comments about Charlottesville when he declared his campaign in 2019. Mr. Trump’s hostility to black activists and his admiration of suppressive government force have been consistent features of his worldview for decades, from his remarks in 1990 praising the “power of strength” in the Chinese government’s crackdown on demonstrators in Tiananmen Square, to his comments during his 2016 campaign and his first year in office that security guards and law enforcement should be aggressive with protesters and detainees.The crisis in Minneapolis recalled scenes of police violence and civil disturbance that scarred the 2016 presidential campaign, and that Mr. Trump seemed to use to his advantage in his contest with Hillary Clinton, his Democratic opponent. During the campaign, Mr. Trump criticized Black Lives Matter protesters seeking to call attention to police brutality, describing the activists as a “threat” in the summer of 2016.  A series of killings that summer — two episodes involving black men killed by police officers in Louisiana and Minnesota, and a mass shooting of police officers in Texas by a black gunman — set a bloody backdrop for Mr. Trump’s nominating convention and may have helped reinforce his law-and-order pledge to “make America safe again.”Yet it was far from clear on Friday that Mr. Trump’s instinct for the mailed fist would offer him comparable political rewards in his re-election campaign. Black activists and political groups responded to Mr. Trump’s statements with shock, accusing the president of using race as a political wedge at the expense of vulnerable communities. Progressive groups said that the events in Minneapolis should not be seen in isolation but as a culmination of sustained police aggression and systemic inequality — present long before Mr. Floyd’s death — and that Mr. Trump’s initial tweets showed how he sees those protesters. “This is a clear representation of a president who has always seen those who stand up to injustice as enemy combatants, and has been uninterested — at every turn — in the role of uniting people,” said Rashad Robinson, president of Color of Change, a racial justice organization.Americans typically expect their president to be not just an enforcer but also a unifier and a healer, roles that Mr. Trump has repeatedly shown no interest in performing. His threat early Friday to have unruly protesters shot exemplified his preference for escalating conflict, often in violent terms, rather than easing it.Should scenes of violence, rioting and arson continue to dominate television screens in the coming weeks, it could ultimately make Mr. Trump’s brute-force language more appealing to some of the white swing voters who embraced him reluctantly in the 2016 election. But that, too, might carry a political price: Mr. Trump’s campaign has been making selective efforts to reach out to black voters, particularly young men, and it is difficult to see how that pursuit could have the desired effect if the president is demonizing police protesters in harsh terms.And as in other arenas of the 2020 campaign, Mr. Trump is confronting an elusive rival in Mr. Biden, who is one of only a few major figures left in the Democratic Party who can claim both a deep bond with black voters and a relatively conservative record on matters of law enforcement. Katie Glueck and Astead W. Herndon contributed reporting. Updated May 29, 2020Advertisement