https://www.nytimes.com/2020/04/22/us/coronavirus-workplaces-midwest.html
Tight-Knit Company Towns Reel as Coronavirus Rolls Through - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
158
AdvertisementSupported byCases are leveling off in some coastal cities, but outbreaks are mounting in processing plants and factories in Midwestern towns.By Dionne SearceyAs soon as she heard about a cluster of coronavirus cases at the Tyson pork processing plant on the edge of Columbus Junction, Iowa, Cindy Johnston felt a ripple effect through her small community along the Iowa River.Ms. Johnston, who manages a Dairy Sweet burgers and ice cream shack, sent home four teenage employees because their parents work at the Tyson plant. Parents of other teenage workers were too afraid of potential infection to let their children report to work at Dairy Sweet. Then, she learned of the death of an employee at the Tyson plant; it was the father of a classmate of her son.“I’ve lived in this community all my life, and I’ve never seen it so scared,” said Ms. Johnston, who is 52, nearly the same age as the father who died.Across the country, some big cities on the coasts are starting to experience a leveling off of Covid-19 cases, but a staggering number of small Midwestern towns anchored by meatpacking plants and other factories are finding themselves as new hot spots of the virus.The new cases are worrying because they come as many officials are contemplating reopening the nation’s businesses. The outbreaks now are raising the prospect of new spread in less populous communities in the middle of the country and complicating these company towns’ debates over when to restart public life.Tyson Foods closed the plant in Columbus Junction earlier this month. The company announced Wednesday it was closing a plant in Logansport, Ind., as well as a large pork processing plant in Waterloo, Iowa, after calls from public officials to shutter the facility amid a growing outbreak.A Smithfield meatpacking plant in Sioux Falls, S.D., has nearly 1,000 cases tied to its facility. And a JBS pork plant in Worthington, Minn., a Hormel food processing facility in Rochelle, Ill., and a ConAgra food processing plant in Marshall, Mo., are among others that have reported significant outbreaks.Infections can spread fast in the facilities as employees work side by side and gather in cafeterias or locker rooms. In many rural Midwestern areas, these businesses are often the only large workplaces for miles around.The new outbreaks have an outsize impact on families, congregations and, in particular, other businesses in communities that are trying to think about reopening as some political leaders in state capitals and in Washington call for the beginnings of a return to economic normalcy.“It’s going to be a new normal for us,” said Michael Schepp, owner of Helix Wine and Bites, a restaurant in Grand Forks, N.D., where public health officials have traced at least 128 positive cases of the virus to a wind power plant.Earlier this week, the plant, called LM Wind Power, which is owned by G.E., closed for what it said would be at least two weeks so it could be disinfected. Along with a university and a hospital system, the plant is one of the biggest employers in Grand Forks.The outbreak was another blow for business owners like Mr. Schepp, who had been scrambling to figure out how the restaurant could reopen its dining room.“As a city we were in really good shape leading up to that, but it shows you how quickly this thing can change,” he said.Gov. Doug Burgum of North Dakota, a Republican, has called for a reopening of the economy on May 1. Mr. Schepp hopes that by then he can allow a limited number of patrons in his dining room. But he said he is not sure exactly how that would work. In the meantime, he has been serving wine by the glass and cocktails to-go.“We’re going to have to reinvent the restaurant industry,” he said.In Madison, Neb., residents are bracing for a broader spread of the virus after six cases were reported at a Tyson plant on Sunday.The plant is the biggest workplace around, with Madison residents and commuters among its employees. Some local businesses such as Burrito King, a beloved restaurant, have closed completely. In the community of about 2,400 residents, volunteers have donated floral bouquets and cupcakes to nursing home residents who no longer can receive visitors because of the virus threat, and the fire department has offered to drive by, sirens blaring, the homes of children celebrating birthdays.Nebraska Gov. Pete Ricketts, a Republican, who has declined to issue a blanket stay-at-home order, has called for a gradual reopening of the economy starting next month. But Madison is planning to take things extra slowly, Al Brandl, the mayor, said.“We want to just get through this,” he said.In Columbus Junction, practically everyone in the community of 2,000 residents works at the Tyson plant or knows someone who does. And now, after the outbreak at the plant earlier this month, nearly everyone knows someone who has the virus. Almost 150 workers among the plant’s 1,400 employees have tested positive for the virus. Two employees have died.The plant looms large over the town, its tentacles reaching a church where sickened employees are among congregants and now in need of prayers and grocery deliveries, and a day care facility that already had seen its numbers shrink and decided to send home children whose parents worked at the plant.It affected the clients of the veterinary practice of Mike Todd who passes by the Tyson plant on his way to farms to treat large animals, a part of his business he still operates because he can maintain social distancing easily in a barn or pasture. Mr. Todd is slowly trying to reopen his Louisa Veterinary Clinic. He’s vaccinating puppies to prevent illness. And on Tuesday, he removed a tumor from a dog. He plans to allow for more elective procedures in the days to come.Updated May 28, 2020States are reopening bit by bit. This means that more public spaces are available for use and more and more businesses are being allowed to open again. The federal government is largely leaving the decision up to states, and some state leaders are leaving the decision up to local authorities. Even if you aren’t being told to stay at home, it’s still a good idea to limit trips outside and your interaction with other people.Touching contaminated objects and then infecting ourselves with the germs is not typically how the virus spreads. But it can happen. A number of studies of flu, rhinovirus, coronavirus and other microbes have shown that respiratory illnesses, including the new coronavirus, can spread by touching contaminated surfaces, particularly in places like day care centers, offices and hospitals. But a long chain of events has to happen for the disease to spread that way. The best way to protect yourself from coronavirus — whether it’s surface transmission or close human contact — is still social distancing, washing your hands, not touching your face and wearing masks.Common symptoms include fever, a dry cough, fatigue and difficulty breathing or shortness of breath. Some of these symptoms overlap with those of the flu, making detection difficult, but runny noses and stuffy sinuses are less common. The C.D.C. has also added chills, muscle pain, sore throat, headache and a new loss of the sense of taste or smell as symptoms to look out for. Most people fall ill five to seven days after exposure, but symptoms may appear in as few as two days or as many as 14 days.If air travel is unavoidable, there are some steps you can take to protect yourself. Most important: Wash your hands often, and stop touching your face. If possible, choose a window seat. A study from Emory University found that during flu season, the safest place to sit on a plane is by a window, as people sitting in window seats had less contact with potentially sick people. Disinfect hard surfaces. When you get to your seat and your hands are clean, use disinfecting wipes to clean the hard surfaces at your seat like the head and arm rest, the seatbelt buckle, the remote, screen, seat back pocket and the tray table. If the seat is hard and nonporous or leather or pleather, you can wipe that down, too. (Using wipes on upholstered seats could lead to a wet seat and spreading of germs rather than killing them.)More than 40 million people — the equivalent of 1 in 4 U.S. workers — have filed for unemployment benefits since the pandemic took hold. One in five who were working in February reported losing a job or being furloughed in March or the beginning of April, data from a Federal Reserve survey released on May 14 showed, and that pain was highly concentrated among low earners. Fully 39 percent of former workers living in a household earning $40,000 or less lost work, compared with 13 percent in those making more than $100,000, a Fed official said.There is an uptick in people reporting symptoms of chilblains, which are painful red or purple lesions that typically appear in the winter on fingers or toes. The lesions are emerging as yet another symptom of infection with the new coronavirus. Chilblains are caused by inflammation in small blood vessels in reaction to cold or damp conditions, but they are usually common in the coldest winter months. Federal health officials do not include toe lesions in the list of coronavirus symptoms, but some dermatologists are pushing for a change, saying so-called Covid toe should be sufficient grounds for testing.Yes, but make sure you keep six feet of distance between you and people who don’t live in your home. Even if you just hang out in a park, rather than go for a jog or a walk, getting some fresh air, and hopefully sunshine, is a good idea.Taking one’s temperature to look for signs of fever is not as easy as it sounds, as “normal” temperature numbers can vary, but generally, keep an eye out for a temperature of 100.5 degrees Fahrenheit or higher. If you don’t have a thermometer (they can be pricey these days), there are other ways to figure out if you have a fever, or are at risk of Covid-19 complications.The C.D.C. has recommended that all Americans wear cloth masks if they go out in public. This is a shift in federal guidance reflecting new concerns that the coronavirus is being spread by infected people who have no symptoms. Until now, the C.D.C., like the W.H.O., has advised that ordinary people don’t need to wear masks unless they are sick and coughing. Part of the reason was to preserve medical-grade masks for health care workers who desperately need them at a time when they are in continuously short supply. Masks don’t replace hand washing and social distancing.If you’ve been exposed to the coronavirus or think you have, and have a fever or symptoms like a cough or difficulty breathing, call a doctor. They should give you advice on whether you should be tested, how to get tested, and how to seek medical treatment without potentially infecting or exposing others.If you’re sick and you think you’ve been exposed to the new coronavirus, the C.D.C. recommends that you call your healthcare provider and explain your symptoms and fears. They will decide if you need to be tested. Keep in mind that there’s a chance — because of a lack of testing kits or because you’re asymptomatic, for instance — you won’t be able to get tested.Charity Navigator, which evaluates charities using a numbers-based system, has a running list of nonprofits working in communities affected by the outbreak. You can give blood through the American Red Cross, and World Central Kitchen has stepped in to distribute meals in major cities.“We’re just being careful,” he said. “Everything is a risk to some extent.”On Main Street in Columbus Junction, Five Star Grocery is still open, but Joseph Hu, the owner, is allowing just two people inside at a time. His small store caters to fellow Burmese immigrants who moved to the town to work at the pork plant.“Now that the virus is here, nobody is shopping,” Mr. Hu said. “A lot of people are scared.”Across the country, everyone is looking ahead to reopening the economy. Mr. Hu is no different, even though the possibility seems tenuous in the small community that is in the midst of managing such a large outbreak.The Tyson plant had shut down on April 6, and Mr. Hu said that his optimism was bolstered after he learned that the plant partially reopened this week. Company officials said that the facility had been disinfected and that they were checking employees’ temperatures, installing workstation dividers and requiring face coverings for workers.Sick employees will be better soon, Mr. Hu predicted, and then they will start shopping again.The owners of Dairy Sweet, a part-year operation that is about two miles from the Tyson plant, opened two weeks ahead of its usual seasonal schedule after realizing business at their other restaurant, the 92 Roadhouse Bar and Grill, was too scarce to keep it open for carryout, said Ms. Johnston, the Dairy Sweet manager.Ms. Johnston said she sensed that the community was starting to feel a bit more at ease in recent days. Ms. Johnston has “adopted” a high school senior, a volunteer project to send small gifts to students whose final high school year has been cut short. She offered on Facebook to buy groceries for anyone in need. So far, she has had no takers.Ms. Johnston is trying to stay healthy. She is downing extra vitamin C and elderberry supplements. Her hands are chapped from washing them so much.At Dairy Sweet, employees are wearing masks and gloves. They rub credit cards with Clorox wipes before and after handling them. Other than that, the business hasn’t changed much since it first opened in 1956.It never had a dining room; customers place orders at a pickup window or a drive-through. In that way, Dairy Sweet is one of the few places in town that feels normal. Most days, in fact, business is way up, double its usual, she said.Mitch Smith and Jack Healy contributed reporting.Advertisement